--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Spain
FILE_NAME: country_spain.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:50:26
----------------

# Spain

## General Overview
Spain, officially the Kingdom of Spain, is a country in Southern and Western Europe with territories in North Africa. Featuring the southernmost point of continental Europe, it is the largest country in Southern Europe and the fourth-most populous European Union (EU) member state. Spanning the majority of the Iberian Peninsula, its territory also includes the Canary Islands, in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean; the Balearic Islands, in the Western Mediterranean Sea; and the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla, in mainland Africa. Peninsular Spain is bordered to the north by France, Andorra, and the Bay of Biscay; to the east and south by the Mediterranean Sea and Gibraltar and Morocco, through its exclaves in North Africa; and to the west by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean. Spain's capital and largest city is Madrid; other major urban areas include Barcelona, Valencia, Seville, Zaragoza, Málaga, Murcia, and Palma de Mallorca.
In early antiquity, the Iberian Peninsula was inhabited by Iberians, Celts, and other pre-Roman peoples. The Roman conquest of the Iberian Peninsula created the province of Hispania, which became deeply Romanised and later Christianised. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the peninsula was conquered by tribes from Central Europe, among them the Visigoths, who established the Visigothic Kingdom centred on Toledo. In the early 8th century, most of the peninsula was conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate, with Al-Andalus centred on Córdoba. The northern Christian kingdoms of Iberia launched the so-called Reconquista, gradually repelling and ultimately expelling Islamic rule from the peninsula, culminating with the fall of the Nasrid Kingdom of Granada. The dynastic union of the Crown of Castile and the Crown of Aragon in 1479 under the Catholic Monarchs is often seen as the de facto unification of Spain as a nation state.
During the Age of Discovery, Spain led the exploration and conquest of the New World, completed the first circumnavigation of the globe, and established one of the largest empires in history, which fostered a global trade system driven by precious metals. In the 18th century, the Nueva Planta decrees centralised Spain under the Bourbons, strengthening royal authority. The 19th century witnessed the victorious Peninsular War (1808–1814) against Napoleonic forces and the loss of most American colonies amid liberal–absolutist conflicts. These struggles culminated in the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) and the Francoist dictatorship (1939–1975). With the restoration of democracy and entry into the EU, Spain experienced a major economic boom and social transformation.
Spain is a secular parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy, with King Felipe VI as head of state. A developed country, Spain has a high nominal GDP per capita globally, and its advanced economy ranks among the largest in the world and is the fourth-largest in the EU. Spanish is the world's second-most spoken native language.

Etymology
The name of Spain (España) comes from Hispania, the name used by the Ancient Romans for the Iberian Peninsula during the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire. The etymology of the term Hispania remains uncertain.
The Phoenicians referred to the region as i-shphan-im, possibly meaning 'land of rabbits or hyraxes', 'land of metals', or 'northern island'. Roman coins struck in the region from the reign of Hadrian show a female figure with a rabbit at her feet, and Strabo called it the 'land of the rabbits'.

History
Prehistory and Iberian peoples
Archaeological research at Atapuerca indicates the Iberian Peninsula was populated by hominids 1.3 million years ago.
Modern humans first arrived in Iberia from the north about 35,000 years ago. The best-known artefacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the paintings in the Altamira cave of Cantabria in northern Iberia, which were created from 35,600 to 13,500 BCE by Cro-Magnon. Archaeological and genetic evidence suggests that the Iberian Peninsula acted as one of several major refugia from which northern Europe was repopulated following the end of the last ice age.
Before the Roman conquest the major cultures along the Mediterranean coast were the Iberians, the Celts in the interior and north-west, the Lusitanians in the west, and the Tartessians in the southwest. The seafaring Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and Greeks successively established trading settlements along the eastern and southern coast. The development of writing in the peninsula took place after the arrival of early Phoenician settlers and traders (tentatively dated 9th century BC or later).
The south of the peninsula was rich in archaic Phoenician colonies, unmatched by any other region in the central-western Mediterranean. They were small and densely packed settlements. The colony of Gadir—which sustained strong links with its metropolis of Tyre—stood out from the rest of the network of colonies, also featuring a more complex sociopolitical organization. Archaic Greeks arrived on the Peninsula by the late 7th century BC. They founded Greek colonies such as Emporion (570 BC).
After the defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War, the Carthaginian general Hamilcar Barca led an expedition to Iberia, where he hoped to gain a new empire for Carthage to compensate for territorial losses. In eight years, by force of arms and diplomacy, Hamilcar secured an extensive territory, covering around half of the Iberian Peninsula. Hamilcar's premature death in battle (228 BC) prevented him from completing the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula.

Roman Hispania and the Visigothic Kingdom
During the Second Punic War, roughly between 210 and 205 BCE, the expanding Roman Republic captured Carthaginian trading colonies along the Mediterranean coast. It took the Romans nearly two centuries to complete the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula. They retained control of it for over six centuries. Roman rule was bound together by law, language, and the Roman road. The cultures of the pre-Roman populations were gradually Romanised (Latinised) at different rates depending on what part of the peninsula they lived in, with local leaders being admitted into the Roman aristocratic class.
Hispania, the Roman name for the Iberian Peninsula, served as a granary for the Roman market, and its harbours exported gold, wool, olive oil, and wine. Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects, some of which remain in use. Emperors Hadrian, Trajan, Theodosius I, and the philosopher Seneca were born in Hispania. Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century CE, and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century. Most of Spain's present languages and religions, as well as the basis of its laws, originate from this period. Starting in 170 CE, incursions of North-African Mauri in the province of Baetica took place.
The Germanic Suebi and Vandals, together with the Sarmatian Alans, entered the peninsula after 409, weakening the Western Roman Empire's jurisdiction over Hispania. The Suebi established a kingdom in north-western Iberia. The Vandals established themselves in the south of the peninsula by 420, before crossing over to North Africa in 429. As the western Roman Empire disintegrated, the social and economic base became greatly simplified. The successor regimes maintained many of the institutions and laws of the late empire, including Christianity and assimilation into the evolving Roman culture.
The Byzantines established an occidental province, Spania, in the south, with the intention of reviving Roman rule throughout Iberia. Eventually, however, Hispania was reunited under Visigothic rule.

Muslim era and Reconquista
From 711 to 718, as part of the expansion of the Umayyad Caliphate which had conquered North Africa from the Byzantine Empire, nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was conquered by Muslims from across the Strait of Gibraltar, resulting in the collapse of the Visigothic Kingdom. Only a small area in the mountainous north of the peninsula stood out of the territory seized during the initial invasion. The Kingdom of Asturias-León consolidated upon this territory. Other Christian kingdoms, such as Navarre and Aragon in the mountainous north, eventually surged upon the consolidation of counties of the Carolingian Marca Hispanica. For several centuries, the fluctuating frontier between the Muslim and Christian-controlled areas of the peninsula was along the Ebro and Douro valleys.
Conversion to Islam proceeded at an increasing pace. The muladíes (Muslims of ethnic Iberian origin) are believed to have formed the majority of the population of Al-Andalus by the end of the 10th century. A series of Viking incursions raided the coasts of the Iberian Peninsula in the 9th and 10th centuries. In the 11th century, the Caliphate of Córdoba collapsed, fracturing into a series of petty kingdoms (Taifas), often subject to the payment of a form of protection money (Parias) to the Northern Christian kingdoms, which otherwise undertook a southward territorial expansion. The capture of the strategic city of Toledo in 1085 marked a significant shift in the balance of power in favour of the Christian kingdoms. The arrival from North Africa of the Islamic ruling sects of the Almoravids and the Almohads achieved temporary unity upon the Muslim-ruled territory, with a stricter, less tolerant application of Islam, and partially reversed some Christian territorial gains.

The Kingdom of León was the strongest Christian kingdom for centuries. In 1188, the first form (restricted to the bishops, the magnates, and 'the elected citizens of each city') of modern parliamentary session in Europe was held in León (Cortes of León). The Kingdom of Castile, formed from Leonese territory, was its successor as the strongest kingdom. The kings and the nobility fought for power and influence in this period. The example of the Roman emperors influenced the political objective of the Crown, while the nobles benefited from feudalism.
Muslim strongholds in the Guadalquivir Valley such as Córdoba (1236) and Seville (1248) fell to Castile in the 13th century. The County of Barcelona and the Kingdom of Aragon entered into a dynastic union and gained territory and power in the Mediterranean. In 1229, Mallorca was conquered, as was Valencia in 1238. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the North-African Marinids established some enclaves around the Strait of Gibraltar. Upon the conclusion of the Granada War, the Nasrid Sultanate of Granada (the remaining Muslim-ruled polity in the Iberian Peninsula after 1246) capitulated in 1492 to the military strength of the Catholic Monarchs, and it was integrated from then on in the Crown of Castile.

Spanish Empire
In 1469, the crowns of the Christian kingdoms of Castile and Aragon were united by the marriage of their monarchs, Isabella I and Ferdinand II, respectively. In 1492, as part of the Spanish Inquisition, Jews were forced to choose between conversion to Catholicism or expulsion; as many as 200,000 Jews were expelled from Castile and Aragon. The year 1492 also marked the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the New World, during a voyage funded by Isabella. Columbus's first voyage crossed the Atlantic and reached the Caribbean Islands, beginning the European exploration and conquest of the Americas.
The Treaty of Granada guaranteed religious tolerance towards Muslims, for a few years before Islam was outlawed in 1502 in Castile and 1527 in Aragon, leading the remaining Muslim population to become nominally Christian Moriscos. About four decades after the War of the Alpujarras (1568–1571), over 300,000 moriscos were expelled, settling primarily in North Africa.

The unification of the crowns of Aragon and Castile by the marriage of their sovereigns laid the basis for modern Spain and the Spanish Empire, although each kingdom of Spain remained a separate country socially, politically, legally, and in currency and language.
Habsburg Spain was one of the leading world powers throughout the 16th century and most of the 17th century, a position reinforced by trade and wealth from colonial possessions and became the world's leading maritime power. It reached its apogee during the reigns of the first two Spanish Habsburgs—Charles V/I (1516–1556) and Philip II (1556–1598). This period saw the Spanish conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires, the Italian Wars, the Schmalkaldic War, the Dutch Revolt, the War of the Portuguese Succession, clashes with the Ottomans, intervention in the French Wars of Religion, and the Anglo-Spanish War.

Through exploration and conquest or royal marriage alliances and inheritance, the Spanish Empire expanded across vast areas in the Americas, the Indo-Pacific, Africa as well as the European continent, including holdings in the Italian Peninsula, the Low Countries and the Franche-Comté. The so-called Age of Discovery featured explorations by sea and by land, the opening-up of new trade routes across oceans, conquests and the beginnings of European colonialism. Precious metals, spices, luxuries, and previously unknown plants brought to the metropole played a leading part in transforming the European understanding of the globe. 

The cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the Spanish Golden Age. The expansion of the empire caused immense upheaval in the Americas as the collapse of societies and empires and new diseases from Europe devastated American indigenous populations. The rise of humanism, the Counter-Reformation and new geographical discoveries and conquests raised issues that were addressed by the intellectual movement now known as the School of Salamanca, which developed the first modern theories of what are now known as international law and human rights.
Spain's 16th-century maritime supremacy was demonstrated by the victory over the Ottoman Empire at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 and over Portugal at the Battle of Ponta Delgada in 1582, and then after the setback of the Spanish Armada in 1588, in a series of victories against England in the Anglo-Spanish War of 1585–1604. In the middle decades of the 17th century, Spain's maritime power went into a long decline with mounting defeats against the Dutch Republic (Battle of the Downs) and then England in the Anglo-Spanish War of 1654–1660. By the 1660s, Spain was struggling to defend its overseas possessions from pirates and privateers.
The Protestant Reformation increased Spain's involvement in religiously charged wars, forcing ever-expanding military efforts across Europe and in the Mediterranean. By the middle decades of a war- and plague-ridden 17th-century Europe, the Spanish Habsburgs had enmeshed Spain in continent-wide religious-political conflicts. These conflicts drained Spain of resources and undermined the economy generally. Spain managed to hold on to most of the scattered Habsburg empire, and help the imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire reverse a large part of the advances made by Protestant forces.
Spain was finally forced to recognise the separation of Portugal and the United Provinces (Dutch Republic), and eventually suffered some serious military reverses to France in the latter stages of the immensely destructive, Europe-wide Thirty Years' War. In the latter half of the 17th century, Spain went into a gradual decline, during which it surrendered several small territories to France and England; however, it maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire, which remained intact until the beginning of the 19th century.

18th century
The decline culminated in a controversy over succession to the throne, which consumed the first years of the 18th century. The War of the Spanish Succession was a wide-ranging international conflict combined with a civil war, and cost the kingdom its European possessions and its position as a leading European power.
During this war, a new dynasty originating in France, the Bourbons, was installed. The Crowns of Castile and Aragon had been long united only by the Monarchy and the common institution of the Inquisition's Holy Office. A number of reform policies, the so-called Bourbon Reforms, were pursued by the Monarchy with the overarching goal of centralised authority and administrative uniformity. They included the abolishment of many of the old regional privileges and laws, as well as the customs barrier between the Crowns of Aragon and Castile in 1717, followed by the introduction of new property taxes in the Aragonese kingdoms.
The 18th century saw a gradual recovery and an increase in prosperity through much of the Spanish empire. The predominant economic policy was interventionist, with the State driving infrastructure development, abolishing internal customs, and reducing export tariffs. Projects of agricultural colonisation with new settlements took place in the south of mainland Spain. Enlightenment ideas began to gain ground among some of the kingdom's elite and monarchy.

Liberalism and nation state
In 1793, Spain went to war against the revolutionary French Republic as a member of the first Coalition. The subsequent War of the Pyrenees polarised the country in a reaction against the gallicised elites and following defeat in the field, peace was made with France in 1795 at the Peace of Basel in which Spain lost control over two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola. In 1807, a secret treaty between Napoleon and the unpopular prime minister led to a new declaration of war against Britain and Portugal. French troops entered the country to invade Portugal but instead occupied Spain's major fortresses. The Spanish king abdicated and a puppet kingdom satellite to the French Empire was installed with Joseph Bonaparte as king.
The 2 May 1808 revolt was one of many uprisings across the country against the French occupation. These revolts marked the beginning of a devastating war of independence against the Napoleonic regime, which resulted in an estimated 300,000 to 500,000 Spanish dead. Further military action by Spanish armies, guerrilla warfare and an Anglo-Portuguese allied army, combined with Napoleon's failure on the Russian front, led to the retreat of French imperial armies from the Iberian Peninsula in 1814, and the return of King Ferdinand VII.
During the war, in 1810, a revolutionary body, the Cortes of Cádiz, was assembled to coordinate the effort against the Bonapartist regime and to prepare a constitution. It met as one body, and its members represented the entire Spanish empire. In 1812, a constitution for universal representation under a constitutional monarchy was declared, but after the fall of the Bonapartist regime, the Spanish king dismissed the Cortes Generales, set on ruling as an absolute monarch.
The French occupation of mainland Spain created an opportunity for overseas criollo elites who resented the privilege towards Peninsular elites and demanded retroversion of the sovereignty to the people. Starting in 1809 the American colonies began a series of revolutions and declared independence, leading to the Spanish American wars of independence that put an end to the metropole's grip over the Spanish Main. Attempts to re-assert control proved futile with opposition not only in the colonies but also in the Iberian peninsula and army revolts followed. By the end of 1826, the only American colonies Spain held were Cuba and Puerto Rico. The Napoleonic War left Spain economically ruined, deeply divided and politically unstable. In the 1830s and 1840s, Carlism (a reactionary legitimist movement supportive of an alternative Bourbon branch), fought against the government forces supportive of Queen Isabella II's dynastic rights in the Carlist Wars. Government forces prevailed, but the conflict between progressives and moderates ended in a weak early constitutional period. The 1868 Glorious Revolution was followed by the 1868–1874 progressive Sexenio Democrático (including the short-lived First Spanish Republic), which yielded to a stable monarchic period, the Restoration (1875–1931).
In the late 19th century nationalist movements arose in the Philippines and Cuba. In 1895 and 1896 the Cuban War of Independence and the Philippine Revolution broke out and eventually the United States became involved. The Spanish–American War was fought from April to August 1898 and resulted in Spain losing the last of its once vast colonial empire outside of North Africa. El Desastre (the Disaster), as the war became known in Spain, gave added impetus to the Generation of '98. Although the period around the turn of the century was one of increasing prosperity, the 20th century brought little social peace. Spain played a minor part in the scramble for Africa. It remained neutral during World War I. The heavy losses suffered by the colonial troops in conflicts in northern Morocco against Riffian tribes brought discredit to the government and undermined the monarchy.
Industrialisation, the development of railways and incipient capitalism developed in several areas of the country, particularly in Barcelona, as well as labour movement and socialist and anarchist ideas. The 1870 Barcelona Workers' Congress and the 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition are good examples of this. In 1879, the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party was founded. A trade union linked to this party, Unión General de Trabajadores, was founded in 1888. In the anarcho-syndicalist trend of the labour movement in Spain, Confederación Nacional del Trabajo was founded in 1910 and Federación Anarquista Ibérica in 1927. Catalanism and Vasquism, alongside other nationalisms and regionalisms in Spain, arose in that period: the Basque Nationalist Party formed in 1895 and Regionalist League of Catalonia in 1901. Political corruption and repression weakened the democratic system of the constitutional monarchy of a two-parties system. The July 1909 Tragic Week events and repression exemplified the social instability of the time. The La Canadiense strike in 1919 led to the first law limiting the working day to eight hours.
After a period of Crown-supported dictatorship from 1923 to 1931, the first elections since 1923, largely understood as a plebiscite on Monarchy, took place: the 12 April 1931 municipal elections. These gave a resounding victory to the Republican-Socialist candidacies in large cities and provincial capitals, with a majority of monarchist councilors in rural areas. The king left the country and the proclamation of the Republic on 14 April ensued, with the formation of a provisional government. A constitution for the country was passed in October 1931 following the June 1931 Constituent general election, and a series of cabinets presided by Manuel Azaña supported by republican parties and the PSOE followed. In the election held in 1933 the right triumphed and in 1936, the left. During the Second Republic there was a great political and social upheaval, marked by a sharp radicalisation of the left and the right. Instances of political violence during this period included the burning of churches, the 1932 failed coup d'état led by José Sanjurjo, the Revolution of 1934 and numerous attacks against rival political leaders. On the other hand, it is also during the Second Republic when important reforms to modernise the country were initiated: a democratic constitution, agrarian reform, restructuring of the army, political decentralisation and women's right to vote.

Civil War and Francoist dictatorship
The Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936: on 17 and 18 July, part of the military carried out a coup d'état that triumphed in only part of the country. The situation led to a civil war, in which the territory was divided into two zones: one under the authority of the Republican government, that counted on outside support from the Soviet Union and Mexico (and from International Brigades), and the other controlled by the putschists (the Nationalist or rebel faction), most critically supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. The Republic was not supported by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of non-intervention. General Francisco Franco was sworn in as the supreme leader of the rebels on 1 October 1936. An uneasy relationship between the Republican government and the grassroots anarchists who had initiated a partial social revolution also ensued.
The civil war was viciously fought and there were many atrocities committed by all sides. The war claimed the lives of over 500,000 people and caused the flight of up to a half-million citizens from the country. On 1 April 1939, five months before the beginning of World War II, the rebel side led by Franco emerged victorious, imposing a dictatorship over the whole country. Thousands were imprisoned after the civil war in Francoist concentration camps. Between 1939 and 1943, approximately 200,000 people in Spain died from famine.
The regime remained nominally "neutral" for much of the Second World War, although it was sympathetic to the Axis and provided the Nazi Wehrmacht with Spanish volunteers in the Eastern Front. The only legal party under Franco's dictatorship was the Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las JONS (FET y de las JONS), formed in 1937 upon the merging of the Fascist Falange Española de las JONS and the Carlist traditionalists and to which the rest of right-wing groups supporting the rebels also added. The name of "Movimiento Nacional", sometimes understood as a wider structure than the FET y de las JONS proper, largely imposed over the latter's name in official documents along the 1950s.
After the war Spain was politically and economically isolated, and was kept out of the United Nations. This changed in 1955, during the Cold War period, when it became strategically important for the US to establish a military presence on the Iberian Peninsula as a counter to any possible move by the Soviet Union into the Mediterranean basin. US Cold War strategic priorities included the dissemination of American educational ideas to foster modernisation and expansion. In the 1960s, Spain registered an unprecedented rate of economic growth which was propelled by industrialisation, a mass internal migration from rural areas to Madrid, Barcelona and the Basque Country and the creation of a mass tourism industry. Franco's rule was also characterised by authoritarianism, promotion of a unitary national identity, National Catholicism, and discriminatory language policies.

Restoration of democracy
In 1962, a group of politicians involved in the opposition to Franco's regime inside the country and in exile met in the congress of the European Movement in Munich, where they made a resolution in favour of democracy. With Franco's death in November 1975, Juan Carlos succeeded to the position of King of Spain and head of state in accordance with the Francoist law. With the approval of the new Spanish Constitution of 1978 and the restoration of democracy, the State devolved much authority to the regions and created an internal organisation based on autonomous communities. The Spanish 1977 Amnesty Law let people of Franco's regime continue inside institutions without consequences, even perpetrators of some crimes during transition to democracy like the Massacre of 3 March 1976 in Vitoria or 1977 Massacre of Atocha.
In the Basque Country, moderate Basque nationalism coexisted with a radical nationalist movement led by the armed organisation ETA until the latter's dissolution in May 2018. The group was formed in 1959 during Franco's rule but had continued to wage its violent campaign even after the restoration of democracy and the return of a large measure of regional autonomy.
On 23 February 1981, rebel elements among the security forces seized the Cortes in an attempt to impose a military-backed government. King Juan Carlos took personal command of the military and successfully ordered the coup plotters, via national television, to surrender.
During the 1980s the democratic restoration made possible a growing open society. New cultural movements based on freedom appeared, like La Movida Madrileña. In May 1982 Spain joined NATO, followed by a referendum after a strong social opposition. That year the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) came to power, the first left-wing government in 43 years. In 1986 Spain joined the European Economic Community, which later became the European Union. The PSOE was replaced in government by the Partido Popular (PP) in 1996 after scandals around participation of the government of Felipe González in the Dirty war against ETA.

Economic prosperity and crash
On 1 January 2002, Spain fully adopted the euro, and Spain experienced strong economic growth, well above the EU average during the early 2000s. However, well-publicised concerns issued by many economic commentators at the height of the boom warned that extraordinary property prices and a high foreign trade deficit were likely to lead to a painful economic collapse.

In 2002, the Prestige oil spill occurred with big ecological consequences along Spain's Atlantic coastline. In 2003 José María Aznar supported US president George W. Bush in the Iraq War, and a strong movement against war rose in Spanish society. In March 2004 a local Islamist terrorist group inspired by Al-Qaeda carried out the largest terrorist attack in Western European history when they killed 191 people and wounded more than 1,800 others by bombing commuter trains in Madrid. Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque terrorist group ETA, evidence of Islamist involvement soon emerged. Because of the proximity of the 2004 Spanish general election, the issue of responsibility quickly became a political controversy, with the main competing parties, the PP (People's Party) and PSOE (Spanish Socialist Workers' party) exchanging accusations over the handling of the incident. The PSOE won the election, led by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero.
In the early 2000s, the proportion of Spain's foreign born population increased rapidly during its economic boom but then declined due to the 2008 financial crisis. In 2005, the Spanish government legalised same sex marriage, becoming the third country worldwide to do so. Decentralisation was supported with much resistance of Constitutional Court and conservative opposition, so did gender politics like quotas or the law against gender violence. Government talks with ETA happened, and the group announced its permanent cease of violence in 2010.
The bursting of the Spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008–2014 Spanish financial crisis. High levels of unemployment, cuts in government spending and corruption within the Royal family and the People's Party served as a backdrop to the 2011–12 Spanish protests. The Catalan independence movement also gained traction. In 2011, Mariano Rajoy's conservative People's Party won the election with 44.6% of votes. As prime minister, he implemented austerity measures for the EU bailout, the EU Stability and Growth Pact. On 19 June 2014, the monarch, Juan Carlos, abdicated in favour of his son, who became Felipe VI.

Constitutional issues
In October 2017 a Catalan independence referendum was held and the Parliament of Catalonia voted to unilaterally declare independence from Spain to form a Catalan Republic on the day the Spanish Senate was discussing approving direct rule over Catalonia as called for by the Spanish Prime Minister. On the same day the Senate granted the power to impose direct rule and Mariano Rajoy dissolved the Catalan parliament and called a new election. No country recognised Catalonia as a separate state.
In June 2018, the Congress of Deputies passed a motion of no-confidence against Rajoy and replaced him with the PSOE leader Pedro Sánchez. In 2019, the first ever coalition government in Spain was formed, between PSOE and Unidas Podemos (now Sumar). Between 2018 and 2024, Spain faced an institutional crisis surrounding the mandate of the General Council of the Judiciary (CGPJ), until finally the mandate got renovated. In January 2020, the COVID-19 virus was confirmed to have spread to Spain, causing life expectancy to drop by more than a year. The European Commission economic recovery package Next Generation EU was created to support the EU member states to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, and will be in use in the period 2021–2026. In March 2021, Spain became the sixth nation in the world to make active euthanasia legal.
Following the general election on 23 July 2023, Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez once again formed a coalition government, this time with Sumar (the successor of Unidas Podemos).
In 2024, the first non-independentist Catalan regional president in over a decade, Salvador Illa, was elected, normalising the constitutional and institutional relations between the national and the regional administrations. According to latest polls, only 17.3% of Catalans feel themselves as "only Catalan". 46% of Catalans would answer "as Spanish as Catalan", while 21.8% "more Catalan than Spanish". According to a 2024 poll of University of Barcelona, over 50% of Catalans would vote against independence, while less than 40% would vote in favour.

Geography
At 505,992 km2 (195,365 sq mi), Spain is the world's fiftieth largest country and Europe's fourth largest country. At 3,715 m (12,188 ft), Mount Teide (Tenerife) is the highest mountain peak in Spain and is the third largest volcano in the world from its base. Spain is a transcontinental country, having territory in both Europe and Africa.
Spain lies between latitudes 27° and 44° N, and longitudes 19° W and 5° E.
On the west, Spain is bordered by Portugal; on the south, it is bordered by Gibraltar and Morocco, through its exclaves in North Africa (Ceuta and Melilla, and the peninsula of de Vélez de la Gomera). On the northeast, along the Pyrenees mountain range, it is bordered by France and Andorra. Along the Pyrenees in Girona, a small exclave town called Llívia is surrounded by France.
Extending to 1,214 km (754 mi), the Portugal–Spain border is the longest uninterrupted border within the European Union.

Islands
Spain also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean and a number of uninhabited islands on the Mediterranean side of the Strait of Gibraltar, known as plazas de soberanía ("places of sovereignty", or territories under Spanish sovereignty), such as the Chafarinas Islands and Alhucemas. The peninsula of de Vélez de la Gomera is also regarded as a plaza de soberanía. The isle of Alborán, located in the Mediterranean between Spain and North Africa, is also administered by Spain, specifically by the municipality of Almería, Andalusia. The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium.
There are 11 major islands in Spain, all of them having their own governing bodies (Cabildos insulares in the Canaries, Consells insulars in Baleares). These islands are specifically mentioned by the Spanish Constitution, when fixing its Senatorial representation (Ibiza and Formentera are grouped, as they together form the Pityusic islands, part of the Balearic archipelago). These islands include Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Lanzarote, Fuerteventura, La Palma, La Gomera and El Hierro in the Canarian archipelago and Mallorca, Ibiza, Menorca and Formentera in the Balearic archipelago.

Mountains and rivers
Mainland Spain is a rather mountainous landmass, dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. After the Pyrenees, the main mountain ranges are the Cordillera Cantábrica (Cantabrian Range), Sistema Ibérico (Iberian System), Sistema Central (Central System), Montes de Toledo, Sierra Morena and the Sistema Bético (Baetic System) whose highest peak, the 3,478-metre-high (11,411-foot) Mulhacén, located in Sierra Nevada, is the highest elevation in the Iberian Peninsula. The highest point in Spain is the Teide, a 3,718-metre (12,198 ft) active volcano in the Canary Islands. The Meseta Central (often translated as 'Inner Plateau') is a vast plateau in the heart of peninsular Spain split in two by the Sistema Central.
There are several major rivers in Spain such as the Tagus (Tajo), Ebro, Guadiana, Douro (Duero), Guadalquivir, Júcar, Segura, Turia and Minho (Miño). Alluvial plains are found along the coast, the largest of which is that of the Guadalquivir in Andalusia.

Climate
Three main climatic zones can be separated, according to geographical situation and orographic conditions:

The Mediterranean climate is characterised by warm or hot and dry summers and is the predominant climate in the country. It has two varieties: Csa and Csb, according to the Köppen climate classification.
The Csa zone is associated with areas with hot summers. It is predominant in the Southern Mediterranean (except southeastern) and Southern Atlantic coast and inland throughout Andalusia, Extremadura and much of the centre of the country. Some areas of Csa, mainly those inland, such as some areas of Castilla-La-Mancha, Extremadura, Madrid and some parts of Andalusia, have cool winters with some continental influences, while the regions with a Mediterranean climate close to the sea have mild winters.
The Csb zone has warm rather than hot summers, and extends to additional cool-winter areas not typically associated with a Mediterranean climate, such as much of central and northern-central of Spain (e.g. western Castile–León, northeastern Castilla-La Mancha and northern Madrid) and into much rainier areas (notably Galicia).
The semi-arid climate (BSk, BSh) is predominant in the southeastern quarter of the country, but is also widespread in other areas of Spain. It covers most of the Region of Murcia, southern and central-eastern Valencia, eastern Andalusia, various areas of Castilla-La-Mancha, Madrid and some areas of Extremadura. Further to the north, it is predominant in the upper and mid reaches of the Ebro valley, which crosses southern Navarre, central Aragon and western Catalonia. It is also found in a small area in northern Andalusia and in a small area in central Castilla-León. Precipitation is limited with the dry season extending beyond the summer and average temperature depending on altitude and latitude.
The oceanic climate (Cfb) is located in the northern quarter of the country, especially in the Atlantic region (Basque Country, Cantabria, Asturias, and partly Galicia and Castile–León). It is also found in northern Navarre, in most highlands areas along the Iberian System and in the Pyrenean valleys, where a humid subtropical variant (Cfa) also occurs. Winter and summer temperatures are influenced by the ocean, and have no seasonal drought.
Apart from these main types, other sub-types can be found, like the alpine climate in areas with very high altitude, the humid subtropical climate in areas of northeastern Spain and the continental climates (Dfc, Dfb / Dsc, Dsb) in the Pyrenees as well as parts of the Cantabrian Range, the Central System, Sierra Nevada and the Iberian System, and a typical desert climate (BWk, BWh) in the zone of Almería, Murcia and eastern Canary Islands. Low-lying areas of the Canary Islands average above 18.0 °C (64.4 °F) during their coolest month, thus having influences of tropical climate, although they cannot properly be classified as tropical climates, as according to AEMET, their aridity is high, thus belonging to an arid or semi-arid climate.
Spain is one of the countries that is most affected by climate change in Europe. In Spain, which already has a hot and dry climate, extreme events such as heatwaves are becoming increasingly frequent. The country is also experiencing more episodes of drought and increased severity of these episodes. Water resources will be severely affected in various climate change scenarios. To mitigate the effects of climate change, Spain is promoting an energy transition to renewable energies, such as solar and wind energy.

Fauna and flora
The fauna presents a wide diversity that is due in large part to the geographical position of the Iberian peninsula between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and between Africa and Eurasia, and the great diversity of habitats and biotopes, the result of a considerable variety of climates and well differentiated regions.
The vegetation of Spain is varied due to several factors including the diversity of the terrain, the climate and latitude. Spain includes different phytogeographic regions, each with its own floral characteristics resulting largely from the interaction of climate, topography, soil type and fire, and biotic factors. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.23/10, ranking it 130th globally out of 172 countries.
Within the European territory, Spain has the largest number of plant species (7,600 vascular plants) of all European countries.
In Spain there are 17.804 billion trees and an average of 284 million more grow each year.

Politics
The constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812. In June 1976, Spain's new King Juan Carlos dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Suárez as Prime Minister. The resulting general election in 1977 convened the Constituent Cortes (the Spanish Parliament, in its capacity as a constitutional assembly) for the purpose of drafting and approving the constitution of 1978. After a national referendum on 6 December 1978, 88% of voters approved of the new constitution. As a result, Spain successfully transitioned from a one-party personalist dictatorship to a multiparty parliamentary democracy composed of 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities. These regions enjoy varying degrees of autonomy thanks to the Spanish Constitution, which nevertheless explicitly states the indivisible unity of the Spanish nation.
According to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Spain performs in the high range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in inclusive suffrage and access to justice.

Governance
The Crown
The Spanish Constitution provides for a separation of powers between five branches of government, which it refers to as "basic State institutions". Foremost amongst these institutions is the Crown (La Corona), the symbol of the Spanish state and its permanence. Spain's "parliamentary monarchy" is a constitutional one whereby the reigning king or queen is the living embodiment of the Crown and thus head of state.
Unlike in some other constitutional monarchies, namely the likes of Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, or the United Kingdom, the monarch is not the fount of national sovereignty or even the nominal chief executive. Rather, the Crown, as an institution, "...arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions..." of the Spanish state. As such, the monarch resolves disputes between the disparate branches, mediates constitutional crises, and prevents abuses of power.
In these respects, the Crown constitutes a fifth moderating branch that does not make public policy or administer public services, functions which rightfully rest with Spain's duly elected legislatures and governments at both the national and regional level. Instead, the Crown personifies the democratic Spanish state, sanctions legitimate authority, ensures the legality of means, and guarantees the execution of the public will.

Put another way, the monarch fosters national unity at home, represents Spaniards abroad (especially with regard to nations of their historical community), facilitates the orderly operation and continuity of the Spanish government, defends representative democracy, and upholds the rule of law. In other words, the Crown is the guardian of the Spanish constitution and of the rights and freedoms of all Spaniards. This stabilising role is in keeping with the monarch's solemn oath upon accession "...to faithfully carry out [my] duties, to obey the Constitution and the laws and ensure that they are obeyed, and to respect the rights of citizens and the Self-governing Communities."
A number of constitutional powers, duties, rights, responsibilities, and functions are assigned to the monarch in his or her capacity as head of state. However, the Crown enjoys inviolability in the performance of these prerogatives and cannot be prosecuted in the very courts which administer justice in its name. For this reason, every official act done by the monarch requires the countersignature of the prime minister or, when appropriate, the president of the Congress of Deputies to have the force of law. The countersigning procedure or refrendo in turn transfers political and legal liability for the royal prerogative to the attesting parties. This provision does not apply to the Royal Household, over which the monarch enjoys absolute control and supervision, or to membership in the Order of the Golden Fleece, which is a dynastic order in the personal gift of the House of Bourbon-Anjou.
The royal prerogatives may be classified by whether they are ministerial functions or reserve powers. Ministerial functions are those royal prerogatives that are, pursuant to the convention established by Juan Carlos I, performed by the monarch after soliciting the advice of the Government, the Congress of Deputies, the Senate, the General Council of the Judiciary, or the Constitutional Tribunal, as the case may be. On the other hand, the reserve powers of the Crown are those royal prerogatives which are exercised in the monarch's personal discretion. Most of the Crown's royal prerogatives are ministerial in practice, meaning the monarch has no discretion in their execution and primarily performs them as a matter of state ceremonial. Nevertheless, when performing said ministerial functions, the monarch has the right to be consulted before acting on advice, the right to encourage a particular course of policy or action, and the right to warn the responsible constitutional authorities against the same. Those ministerial functions are as follows:

Sanction and promulgate bills duly passed by the Cortes Generales, making them laws. The Spanish Constitution mandates the monarch grant royal assent to each bill within fifteen days of its passage. The monarch does not have a right to veto legislation.
Summon the Cortes Generales into session following a general election, dissolve the same upon the expiration of its four-year term, and proclaim the election of the next Cortes. These functions are performed in accordance with the strictures of the Spanish Constitution.
Appoint and dismiss ministers of state on the advice of the prime minister.
Appoint the president of the Supreme Court on the advice of the General Council of the Judiciary.
Appoint the president of the Constitutional Tribunal from among its members, on the advice of the full bench, for a term of three years.
Appoint the Fiscal General, who leads the Prosecution Ministry, on the advice of the Government. Before tendering advice, the Government is required to consult the General Council of the Judiciary.
Appoint the presidents of the autonomous communities as elected by their respective parliaments.
Issue decrees approved in the Council of Ministers, confer civil service and military appointments, and award honours and distinctions in the gift of the state. These functions are performed on the advice of the prime minister or another minister designated thereby.
Exercise supreme command and control over the Armed Forces, on the advice of the prime minister.
Declare war and make peace on the advice of the prime minister and with the prior authorization of the Cortes Generales.
Ratify treaties, on the advice of the prime minister.
Accredit Spanish ambassadors and ministers to foreign states and receive the credentials of foreign diplomats to Spain, on the advice of the prime minister.
Exercise the right of clemency, but without the authority to grant general pardons, on the advice of the prime minister.
Patronise the Royal Academies.
The aforesaid limitations do not apply to the exercise of the Crown's reserve powers, which may be invoked by the monarch when necessary to maintain the continuity and stability of state institutions. For example, the monarch has the right to be kept informed on affairs of state through regular audiences with the Government. For this purpose, the monarch may preside at any time over meetings of the Council of Ministers, but only when requested by the prime minister. The monarch may prematurely dissolve the Congress of Deputies, the Senate, or both houses of the Cortes in their entirety before the expiration of their four-year term and, in consequence thereof, concurrently call for snap elections. The monarch exercises this prerogative on the request of the prime minister, after the matter has been discussed by the Council of Ministers. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse the request. The monarch may also order national referendums on the request of the prime minister, but only with the prior authorisation of the Cortes Generales. Again, the monarch may choose to accept or refuse the prime minister's request.
The Crown's reserve powers further extend into constitutional interpretation and the administration of justice. The monarch appoints the 20 members of the General Council of the Judiciary. Of these counselors, twelve are nominated by the supreme, appellate and trial courts, four are nominated by the Congress of Deputies by a majority of three-fifths of its members, and four are nominated by the Senate with the same majority. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse any nomination. In a similar vein, the monarch appoints the twelve magistrates of the Constitutional Tribunal. Of these magistrates, four magistrates are nominated by the Congress of Deputies by a majority of three-fifths of its members, four magistrates are nominated by the Senate with the same majority, two magistrates are nominated by the Government, and two magistrates are nominated by the General Council of the Judiciary. The monarch may choose to accept or refuse any nomination.
It is the monarch's reserve powers concerning Government formation that are perhaps the most frequently exercised. The monarch nominates a candidate for prime minister and, as the case may be, appoints or removes him or her from office based on the prime minister's ability to maintain the confidence of the Congress of Deputies. If the Congress of Deputies fails to give its confidence to a new Government within two months, and is incapable of governing as a result of parliamentary gridlock, the monarch may dissolve the Cortes Generales and call for fresh elections. The monarch makes use of these reserve powers in his own deliberative judgment after consulting the president of the Congress of Deputies.

Cortes Generales
Legislative authority vests in the Cortes Generales (English: Spanish Parliament, lit. 'General Courts'), a democratically elected bicameral parliament that serves as the supreme representative body of the Spanish people. Aside from the Crown, it is the only basic State institution that enjoys inviolability. It comprises the Congress of Deputies (Congreso de los Diputados), a lower house with 350 deputies, and the Senate (Senado), an upper house with 266 senators.
Deputies are elected by popular vote on closed lists via proportional representation to serve four-year terms. 208 senators are directly elected by popular vote using a limited voting method, with the remaining 58 senators appointed by the regional legislatures to also serve four-year terms.

Government
Executive authority rests with the Government (Gobierno de España), which is collectively responsible to the Congress of Deputies. It consists of the prime minister, one or more deputy prime ministers, and the ministers of state. These characters together constitute the Council of Ministers which, as Spain's central executive authority, conducts the business of the Government and administers the civil service. The Government remains in office so long as it can maintain the confidence of the Congress of Deputies.
The prime minister, as head of government, has primacy over the other ministers by virtue of their ability to advise the monarch as to their appointment and dismissal. The prime minister has plenary authority conferred by the Spanish Constitution to direct and coordinate the Government's policies and administrative actions. The Spanish monarch nominates the prime minister after consulting representatives from the different parliamentary groups and appoints him or her to office upon a vote of investiture in the Congress of Deputies.
Some political corruption in Spain has been found.

Administrative divisions
Autonomous communities
Spain's autonomous communities are the first level administrative divisions of the country. They were created after the 1978 constitution came into effect in recognition of the right to self-government of the "nationalities and regions of Spain". The autonomous communities were to comprise adjacent provinces with common historical, cultural, and economic traits. This territorial organisation, based on devolution, is known in Spain as the "State of Autonomies" (Estado de las Autonomías).
The basic institutional law of each autonomous community is the Statute of Autonomy. The Statutes of Autonomy establish the name of the community according to its historical and contemporary identity, the limits of its territories, the name and organisation of the institutions of government and the rights they enjoy according to the constitution. This ongoing process of devolution means that, while officially a unitary state, Spain is nevertheless one of the most decentralised countries in Europe, along with federations like Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland.
Catalonia, Galicia and the Basque Country, which identified themselves as nationalities, were granted self-government through a rapid process. Andalusia also identified itself as a nationality in its first Statute of Autonomy, even though it followed the longer process stipulated in the constitution for the rest of the country. Progressively, other communities in revisions to their Statutes of Autonomy have also taken that denomination in accordance with their historical and modern identities, such as the Valencian Community, the Canary Islands, the Balearic Islands, and Aragon.
The autonomous communities have wide legislative and executive autonomy, with their own elected parliaments and governments as well as their own dedicated public administrations. The distribution of powers may be different for every community, as laid out in their Statutes of Autonomy, since devolution was intended to be asymmetrical. For instance, only two communities—the Basque Country and Navarre—have full fiscal autonomy based on ancient foral provisions. Each autonomous community is responsible for healthcare and education, among other public services.
Beyond these competencies, the nationalities—Andalusia, the Basque Country, Catalonia, and Galicia—were also devolved more powers than the other communities, among them the ability of the regional president to dissolve the parliament and call for elections at any time. In addition, the Basque Country, the Canary Islands, Catalonia, and Navarre each have autonomous police corps of their own: Ertzaintza, Policía Canaria, Mossos d'Esquadra, and Policía Foral respectively. Other communities have shared units with the National Police Corps or no regional police forces at all.

Provinces and municipalities
Autonomous communities are divided into provinces, which serve as their territorial building blocks. Provinces are divided into municipalities. The existence of both the provinces and the municipalities is guaranteed and protected by the constitution, not necessarily by the Statutes of Autonomy themselves. Municipalities are granted autonomy to manage their internal affairs. Provinces are the territorial divisions designed to carry out the activities of the State.
The current provincial division structure is based—with minor changes—on the 1833 territorial division by Javier de Burgos. The Spanish territory is divided into 50 provinces. The communities of Asturias, Cantabria, La Rioja, the Balearic Islands, Madrid, Murcia and Navarre are the only communities that comprise a single province, which is coextensive with the community itself. In these cases, the administrative institutions of the province are replaced by the governmental institutions of the community.

Foreign relations
After the return of democracy following the death of Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with the West.
As a member of NATO since 1982, Spain has established itself as a participant in multilateral international security activities. Spain's EU membership represents an important part of its foreign policy. On a wide range of issues, Spain often prefers to coordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political cooperation mechanisms. In addition to being represented via EU membership, Spain is a permanently invited guest to all G20 summits.
Spain has maintained its special relations with Hispanic America and the Philippines. Its policy emphasises the concept of an Ibero-American community, essentially the renewal of the concept of "Hispanidad" or "Hispanismo", as it is often referred to in English, which has sought to link the Iberian Peninsula with Hispanic America through language, commerce, history and culture. It is fundamentally "based on shared values and the recovery of democracy."
Spain is involved in a number of territorial disputes. Spain claims Gibraltar, an Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom, in the southernmost part of the Iberian Peninsula. Another dispute surrounds the Savage Islands; Spain claims that they are rocks rather than islands, and therefore does not accept the Portuguese Exclusive Economic Zone (200 nautical miles) generated by the islands. Spain claims sovereignty over the Perejil Island, a small, uninhabited rocky islet located in the South shore of the Strait of Gibraltar. It was the subject of an armed incident between Spain and Morocco in 2002. Morocco claims the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the plazas de soberanía islets off the northern coast of Africa. Portugal does not recognise Spain's sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza.

Military
The Spanish Armed Forces are divided into three branches: Army (Ejército de Tierra); Navy (Armada); and Air and Space Force (Ejército del Aire y del Espacio).
The armed forces of Spain are known as the Spanish Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Españolas). Their commander-in-chief is the King of Spain, Felipe VI. The next military authorities in line are the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence. The fourth military authority of the State is the Chief of the Defence Staff (JEMAD). The Defence Staff (Estado Mayor de la Defensa) assists the JEMAD as auxiliary body.
The Spanish armed forces are a professional force with a strength in 2017 of 121,900 active personnel and 4,770 reserve personnel. Spain also has the 77,000 strong Civil Guard which comes under the control of the Ministry of defence in times of a national emergency. In 2015, the Spanish defence budget was 5.71 billion euros (US$7.2 billion), with a 1% increase. The increase comes because of security concerns. Military conscription ended in 2001.
According to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Spain is the 23rd most peaceful country in the world.

Human rights
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 "protect all Spaniards and all the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights, their cultures and traditions, languages and institutions". According to Amnesty International (AI), government investigations of alleged police abuses are often lengthy and punishments were light. Violence against women was a problem, which the Government took steps to address. Spain provides one of the highest degrees of liberty in the world for its LGBT community. Among the countries studied by Pew Research in 2013, Spain is rated first in acceptance of homosexuality, with 88% of those surveyed saying that homosexuality should be accepted.
The Cortes Generales approved the Gender Equality Act in 2007 aimed at furthering equality between genders in Spanish political and economic life. According to Inter-Parliamentary Union data for September 2018, 137 of the 350 members of the Congress were women (39.1%), while in the Senate, there were 101 women out of 266 (39.9%), placing Spain 16th on their list of countries ranked by proportion of women in the lower (or single) House. In 2008, the Gender Empowerment Measure of Spain in the United Nations Human Development Report was 0.794, 12th in the world.

Economy
Spain has a mixed economy that combines elements of free-market capitalism with social welfare and state intervention. It is one of 19 countries with a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) exceeding $1 trillion per year, ranking 12th largest worldwide and fourth largest both in the European Union and within the eurozone. Spain is classified as a high-income economy by the World Bank and an advanced economy by the International Monetary Fund. As of 2024, it is the fastest growing major advanced economy in the world, growing nearly four times higher than the eurozone average.
Spain began industrialising in the late 18th century, albeit more gradually and unevenly than other European countries; industry was limited mostly to Catalonia (primarily textile manufacturing) and the Basque Country (iron and steel production). Overall economic growth was slower than in most major western European countries, and Spain remained relatively underdeveloped by the early 20th century. The Spanish Civil War, followed by failed autarkic and interventionist policies that were worsened by international isolation, left the economy on the brink of collapse by the late 1950s. Technocratic reforms were enacted to avert the crisis, laying the groundwork for the Spanish economic miracle, a period of rapid growth from 1960 until 1974, during which Spain's economy grew an average of 6.6 percent per year, exceeding every country except Japan.
Since its transition to democracy in the late 1970s, Spain has generally sought to liberalise its economy and deepen regional and international integration. It joined the European Economic Community—now the European Union—in 1986 and implemented policies and reforms that allowed for its participation in the inaugural launch of the euro in 1999. Spain's largest trade and investment partners are within the EU and eurozone, including its four largest export markets; EU membership also coincided with a tripling of foreign direct investment from 1990 to 2000. Spain was among the countries affected most by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent European debt crisis, leading to the 2008–2014 Spanish financial crisis.
Spain has long struggled with high unemployment, which has never fallen below 8 percent since the 1980s. In 2013, unemployment hit a peak of 27%. It stood at 9.93 percent in January 2026, the lowest since 2008. Youth unemployment is particularly severe by both global and regional standards; at 24.90 percent (as of January 2025), it is the highest among EU members and well above the EU average of 14.6 percent. Perennial weak points of Spain's economy include a large informal economy; an education system that performs poorly compared to most developed countries; and low rates of private sector investment. Median equivalised disposable income was $26,630 per year (2021, PPP).
Since the 1990s, which saw a wave of privatisations, several Spanish companies have reached multinational status; they maintain a strong and leading presence in Latin America—where Spain is the second largest foreign investor after the United States—but have also expanded into Asia, especially China and India. As of 2023, Spain was home to eight of the 500 largest companies in the world by annual revenue, according to the Fortune Global 500; these include Banco Santander, the 14th-largest banking institution in the world; electric utility Iberdrola, the world's largest renewable energy operator; and Telefónica, one of the largest telephone operators and mobile network providers. Twenty Spanish companies are listed in the 2023 Forbes Global 2000 ranking of the 2,000 largest public companies, reflecting diverse sectors such as construction (ACS Group), aviation (ENAIRE), pharmaceuticals (Grifols), and transportation (Ferrovial). Additionally, one of Spain's largest private sector entities is Mondragon Corporation, the world's largest worker-owned cooperative.
The automotive industry is one of the largest employers in the country and a major contributor to economic growth, accounting for one-tenth of gross domestic product and 18 percent of total exports (including vehicles and auto-parts). In 2023, Spain produced 2.45 million automobiles—of which over 2.1 million were exported abroad—ranking eighth in the world and second in Europe (after Germany) by total number. In total, 89 percent of vehicles and 60% of auto-parts manufactured in Spain were exported worldwide in 2023; the total external trade surplus of vehicles alone reached €18.8bn in 2023. Overall, the automotive industry supports nearly 2 million jobs, or 9 percent of the labour force.

Tourism
In 2024, Spain was the second most visited country in the world only behind France, recording 94 million tourists. The international tourist expenditure in 2024 was around 126 billion euros. The headquarters of the World Tourism Organization are located in Madrid.
Spain's geographic location, popular coastlines, diverse landscapes, historical legacy, vibrant culture, and excellent infrastructure have made the country's international tourist industry among the largest in the world. Tourism in Spain is a major contributor to national economic life, with foreign and domestic tourism contributing to 12.3% of Spain's GDP in 2023.
Castile and León is the Spanish leader in rural tourism linked to its environmental and architectural heritage which it has kept since 2020.

Energy
In 2010 Spain became the solar power world leader when it overtook the United States with a massive power station plant called La Florida, near Alvarado, Badajoz. Spain is also Europe's main producer of wind energy. In 2010 its wind turbines generated 16.4% of all electrical energy produced in Spain. On 9 November 2010, wind power reached a historic peak covering 53% of mainland electricity demand and generating 14.2 GW of power, equivalent to that of 14 nuclear reactors. Other renewable energies used in Spain are hydroelectric, biomass and marine.
Non-renewable energy sources used in Spain are nuclear (8 operative reactors), gas, coal, and oil. Fossil fuels together generated 58% of Spain's electricity in 2009, just below the OECD mean of 61%. Nuclear power generated another 19%, and wind and hydro about 12% each.

Science and technology
The Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC) is the leading public agency dedicated to scientific research in the country. It ranked as the 5th top governmental scientific institution worldwide (and 32nd overall) in the 2018 SCImago Institutions Rankings. Spain was ranked 29th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.
Higher education institutions perform about a 60% of the basic research in the country. Likewise, the contribution of the private sector to R&D expenditures is much lower than in other EU and OECD countries.

Transport
The Spanish road system is mainly centralised, with six highways connecting Madrid to the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, West Andalusia, Extremadura and Galicia. Additionally, there are highways along the Atlantic (Ferrol to Vigo), Cantabrian (Oviedo to San Sebastián) and Mediterranean (Girona to Cádiz) coasts. Spain aims to put one million electric cars on the road by 2014 as part of the government's plan to save energy and boost energy efficiency. The former Minister of Industry Miguel Sebastián said that "the electric vehicle is the future and the engine of an industrial revolution."
As of February 2025, the Spanish high-speed rail network is the longest HSR network in Europe with 3,973 km (2,469 mi) and the second longest in the world, after China's. It is linking Málaga, Seville, Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia and Valladolid, with the trains operated at commercial speeds up to 330 km/h (210 mph). On average, the Spanish high-speed train is the fastest one in the world, followed by the Japanese bullet train and the French TGV. Regarding punctuality, it is second in the world (98.5% on-time arrival) after the Japanese Shinkansen (99%).
There are 49 public airports in Spain. The busiest one is the airport of Madrid (Barajas), with 60 million passengers in 2023, being the world's 15th busiest airport, as well as the European Union's third busiest. The airport of Barcelona (El Prat) is also important, with 50 million passengers in 2024, being the world's 30th-busiest airport. Other main airports are located in Mallorca, Málaga, Las Palmas (Gran Canaria), and Alicante.

Demographics
In January 2026, Spain had a population of 49,570,725 people as recorded by Spain's Instituto Nacional de Estadística. That same month, people born in Spain accounted for 85.4% of the total population and people born abroad accounted for 20.3% of the total population. Spain's population density, at 98/km2 (253.8/sq mi), is lower than that of most Western European countries, and its distribution across the territory is highly uneven. With the notable exception of the region surrounding the capital, Madrid, the most densely populated areas are located along the coast. The population of Spain has risen 2+1⁄2 times since 1900, when it stood at 18.6 million, principally due to the spectacular demographic boom in the 1960s and early 1970s.
In 2024, Spain's total fertility rate (TFR) stood at 1.10 children per woman, the second lowest in the European Union after Malta and among the lowest worldwide. This rate is well below the replacement level of 2.1 and contrasts sharply with the historical maximum of 5.11 children per woman recorded in 1865. As a result, Spain has one of the oldest populations globally, with a median age of 46.8 years.
After the birth rate plunged in the 1980s and Spain's population growth rate dropped, the population again trended upward initially upon the return of many Spaniards who had emigrated to other European countries during the 1970s, and more recently, fuelled by large numbers of immigrants who make up more than 19% of the population today: Among non-EU immigrants, they are mainly from Latin America (39%), North Africa (16%), Eastern Europe (15%), and Sub-Saharan Africa (4%).
In 2024, the number of foreign residents who acquired Spanish nationality increased by 5.1% to 252,476. The most frequent nationalities of origin were Morocco (42,910), Venezuela (30,403) and Colombia (26,224). Spain has a number of descendants of populations from former colonies, especially Latin America and North Africa. Smaller numbers of immigrants from several Sub-Saharan countries have recently been settling in Spain. There are also sizeable numbers of Asian immigrants, most of whom are of Middle Eastern, South Asian and Chinese origin. The single largest group of immigrants are European; represented by large numbers of Romanians, Britons, Germans, French and others.

Urbanisation
According to data from the World Bank, approximately 81.6% of Spain's population lived in urban areas as of 2023, reflecting a continuing trend of urbanisation that has characterised the country's demographic landscape in recent decades. This concentration has contributed to the dominance of urban areas in economic, political, and cultural spheres.

Migration
According to official statistics from the Spanish National Institute of Statistics (INE), as of January 2026, over 10 million people in Spain were born abroad, accounting for 20.3% of the total population. Among them, over 7 million (15.4%) were born outside Europe, and more than 7 million (14.3%) held foreign nationality. By number of immigrants, Spain ranks fourth in Europe and seventh worldwide.
As of December 2024, the largest source of immigrants was Morocco (over 1 million), Colombia (856,616), Venezuela (599,769), Romania (532,456), and Ecuador (448,643). Most immigrants come from outside the EU, especially Latin America, with sizeable populations from the United Kingdom, Ukraine, China, Russia, Pakistan, Algeria, and Senegal.
Historically a land of emigration, immigration to Spain has increased markedly since the 21st century, with immigrants rising from 1.6% of the population in 1998 to over 12% by 2009; in absolute terms, the number of immigrants grew from 500,000 in 1996 to 5.2 million in 2008. Spain was Europe's top recipient of migrants from 2002 to 2007, with 2.5 million arrivals. In 2005, Spain had the second highest immigration rate in the European Union, after Cyprus, and the highest in absolute numbers, with an amnesty programme increasing the legal immigrant population by 700,000.
The very high level of immigration is driven by a number of factors, including Spain's cultural ties with Latin America, its geographical position, the porosity of its borders, the large size of its underground economy, and the strength of the agricultural and construction sectors, which demand more low-cost labour than can be offered by the national workforce. A large number of EU residents retire to Spain's Mediterranean coast; in 2008, prior to the onset of the economic crisis, the Financial Times reported that Spain was the most favoured destination for Western Europeans considering a move from their own country and seeking jobs elsewhere in the EU.
Until 2014, the number of immigrants decreased due to the economic crisis, with more than half a million people leaving Spain in 2011 alone—the first net migration rate in decades. However, notwithstanding economic factors, as well as policies to encourage non-EU unemployed immigrants to voluntarily depart the country, the rate of emigration remained relatively low. By 2015, net immigration had increased, and Spain has again become a major immigration destination, backed by government policies to increase the labour force and promote integration. The Sánchez government planned to legalize around 900,000 undocumented migrants by 2027.

Languages
Spain is a multilingual state. Spanish—featured in the 1978 Spanish Constitution as castellano ('Castilian')—has effectively been the official language of the entire country since 1931. As allowed in the third article of the Constitution, the other 'Spanish languages' can also become official in their respective autonomous communities. The territoriality created by the form of co-officiality codified in the 1978 Constitution creates an asymmetry, in which Spanish speakers' rights apply to the entire territory whereas vis-à-vis the rest of co-official languages, their speakers' rights only apply in their territories.
Besides Spanish, other territorialised languages include Aragonese, Aranese, Astur-Leonese, Basque, Ceutan Arabic (Darija), Catalan/Valencian, Galician, Portuguese and Tamazight, to which the Romani Caló and the sign languages may add up. The number of speakers varies widely and their legal recognition is uneven, with some of the most vulnerable languages lacking any sort of effective protection. Those enjoying recognition as official language in some autonomous communities include Catalan/Valencian (in Catalonia and the Balearic Islands officially named as Catalan and in the Valencian Community officially named as Valencian); Galician (in Galicia); Basque (in the Basque Country and part of Navarre); and Aranese in Catalonia.
According to an official survey complementary to the 2021 census carried out by National Statistics Institute, Spanish is considered as first language by 81.53%, while Catalan/Valencian by 10.50%, Galician by 3.77% and Basque by 1.42% of the Spanish population. The most spoken foreign language was Arabic with 2.17% of the population considering it as their first language, followed by English with 1.58%, Romanian with 1.44%, French with 0.94%, Portuguese with 0.54%, Chinese with 0.48%, German with 0.44% and Italian with 0.41%. Such diversity of foreign languages is mainly due to international migration.
Spanish is the world's second-most spoken native language and the world's most widely spoken Romance language.

Education
State education in Spain is free and compulsory from the age of six to sixteen. The current education system is regulated by the 2006 educational law, LOE (Ley Orgánica de Educación), or Fundamental Law for the Education. In 2014, the LOE was partially modified by the newer and controversial LOMCE law (Ley Orgánica para la Mejora de la Calidad Educativa), or Fundamental Law for the Improvement of the Education System, commonly called Ley Wert (Wert Law). Since 1970 to 2014, Spain has had seven different educational laws (LGE, LOECE, LODE, LOGSE, LOPEG, LOE and LOMCE).
The levels of education are preschool education, primary education, secondary education and post-16 education. In regards to the professional development education or the vocational education, there are three levels besides the university degrees: the Formación Profesional Básica (basic vocational education); the Ciclo Formativo de Grado Medio or CFGM (medium level vocation education) which can be studied after studying the secondary education, and the Ciclo Formativo de Grado Superior or CFGS (higher level vocational education), which can be studied after studying the post-16 education level.
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of Spanish 15-year-olds as significantly below the OECD average of 493 in reading literacy, mathematics, and science.

Health
The health care system of Spain (Spanish National Health System) is considered one of the best in the world, in 7th position in the ranking elaborated by the World Health Organisation. The health care is public, universal and free for any legal citizen of Spain. The total health spending is 9.4% of the GDP, slightly above the average of 9.3% of the OECD. The life expectancy in Spain has improved from 79.1 years in 2000 to 82.7 years in 2021.

Religion
Roman Catholicism, which has a long history in Spain, remains the dominant religion. Although it no longer has official status by law, in all public schools in Spain students have to choose either a religion or ethics class. Catholicism is the religion most commonly taught, although the teaching of Islam, Judaism, and evangelical Christianity is also recognised in law. Recent polls and surveys suggest that around 30% of the Spanish population is irreligious.
The Spanish constitution enshrines secularism in governance, as well as freedom of religion or belief for all, saying that no religion should have a "state character", while allowing for the state to "cooperate" with religious groups. Protestant churches have about 1,200,000 members. There are about 105,000 Jehovah's Witnesses. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has approximately 46,000 adherents in 133 congregations.
A study made by the Union of Islamic Communities of Spain demonstrated that there were more than 2,100,000 inhabitants of Muslim background living in Spain as of 2019, accounting for 4–5% of the total population of Spain. The vast majority was composed of immigrants and descendants originating from the Maghreb (especially Morocco) and other African countries. More than 879,000 (42%) of them had Spanish nationality.
Judaism was practically non-existent in Spain from the 1492 expulsion until the 19th century, when Jews were again permitted to enter the country. Currently, there are around 62,000 Jews in Spain, or 0.14% of the total population.

Culture
Spain is a Western country and one of the major Latin countries of Europe, and has been noted for its international cultural influence. Spanish culture is marked by strong historic ties to the Catholic Church, which played a pivotal role in the country's formation and subsequent identity. Spanish art, architecture, cuisine, and music have been shaped by successive waves of foreign invaders, as well as by the country's Mediterranean climate and geography. The centuries-long colonial era globalised Spanish language and culture, with Spain also absorbing the cultural and commercial products of its diverse empire. Since the Spanish Golden Age, Spanish art, architecture, music, painting, literature, and cuisine have been influential worldwide, particularly in Western Europe and the Americas. Spain is the world's second-most visited country, has one of the largest numbers of World Heritage Sites, and is the most popular destination for European students. Considered a cultural superpower, its cultural influence extends to over 600 million Hispanophones, making Spanish the world's second-most spoken native language and the world's most widely spoken Romance language.
Bullfighting is widely regarded as one of Spain's most iconic cultural and artistic traditions, although it remains a subject of ongoing social and political debate. In 2013, it was officially recognized as part of the country's cultural heritage.

World Heritage Sites
Spain has 50 World Heritage Sites. These include the landscape of Monte Perdido in the Pyrenees, which is shared with France, the Prehistoric Rock Art Sites of the Côa Valley and Siega Verde, which is shared with Portugal, the Heritage of Mercury, shared with Slovenia and the Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests, shared with other countries of Europe. In addition, Spain has also 14 Intangible cultural heritage, or "Human treasures".

Philosophy
The construct pertaining a distinctive Spanish philosophical thought has been variously approached by academia, either by diachronically tracing its development throughout the centuries from the Roman conquest of Hispania on (with early representatives such as Seneca, Trajan, Lucan, or Martial); by pinpointing its origins to the late 19th century (associated to the Generation of 98); or simply by outright denying its existence. The crux around the existence of a Spanish philosophy pitted the likes of Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo (chief architect of the myth around it) against Antonio Pérez. Foreign imports such as Krausism proved to be extremely influential in Spain in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

Literature
Some early examples of vernacular Romance-based literature include short snippets of Mozarabic Romance (such as refrains) sprinkled in Arabic and Hebrew texts. Other examples of early Iberian Romance include the Glosas Emilianenses written in Latin, Basque and Romance.
Early Medieval literature in Christian Iberia was written in Latin, which remained as the standard literary language up until the mid-13th century, whereas Ibero-Romance vernaculars and Basque were spoken. A decisive development ensued in the 13th century in Toledo, where Arabic scholarship was translated to the local vernacular, Castilian. In the scope of lyric poetry Castilian co-existed alongside Galician-Portuguese across the Crown of Castile up until the 16th century. The Romance variety preferred in Eastern Iberia for lyrical poetry, Occitan, became increasingly Catalanised in the 14th and 15th centuries. Major literary works from the Middle Ages include the Cantar de Mio Cid, Tirant lo Blanch, The Book of Good Love and Coplas por la muerte de su padre. Genres such as Mester de Juglaría and Mester de Clerecía were cultivated.
Promoted by the monarchs in the late Middle Ages and even codified in the late 15th century, Castilian (thought to be widespread known as 'Spanish' from the 16th century on) progressively became the language of the elites in the Iberian Peninsula, which ushered in a Golden era of Castilian literature in the 16th and 17th centuries, also in the science domain, eclipsing Galician and Catalan. Famous Early Modern works include La Celestina and Lazarillo de Tormes. The famous Don Quijote de La Mancha by Miguel de Cervantes was written at this time. Other writers from the period are: Francisco de Quevedo, Lope de Vega, Calderón de la Barca or Tirso de Molina. During the Enlightenment authors included Benito Jerónimo Feijóo, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, and Leandro Fernández de Moratín.

Steps of Spanish Romantic literature (initially a rebellion against French classicism) have been traced back to the last quarter of the 18th century, even if the movement had its heyday between 1835 and 1850, waning thereafter. In a broader definition encompassing the period from 1868 or 1874 to 1936, the so-called Silver Age of Spanish Culture ensued.
The waning of Romantic literature was followed by the development of Spanish Realism, which offered depictions of contemporary life and society 'as they were', rather than romanticised or stylised presentations. The major realist writer was Benito Pérez Galdós. The second half of the 19th century also saw the resurgence of the literary use of local languages other than Spanish under cultural movements inspired by Romanticism such as the Catalan Renaixença or the Galician Rexurdimento. Rarely used before in a written medium, the true fostering of the literary use of the Basque language had to wait until the 1960s, even if some interest towards the language had developed in the late 19th century. 20th-century authors were classified in loose literary generations such as the Generation of '98, the Generation of '27, Generation of '36 and the Generation of '50.
Premio Planeta de Novela and Miguel de Cervantes Prize are the two main awards in Spanish literature.

Art
Artists from Spain have been highly influential in the development of various European and American artistic movements. Due to historical, geographical and generational diversity, Spanish art has known a great number of influences. The Mediterranean heritage with Greco-Roman and some Moorish influences in Spain, especially in Andalusia, is still evident today. European influences include Italy, Germany and France, especially during the Renaissance, Spanish Baroque and Neoclassical periods. There are many other autochthonous styles such as the Pre-Romanesque art and architecture, Herrerian architecture or the Isabelline Gothic.
During the Golden Age painters working in Spain included El Greco, José de Ribera, Bartolomé Esteban Murillo and Francisco Zurbarán. Also, in the Baroque period, Diego Velázquez created some of the most famous Spanish portraits, such as Las Meninas and Las Hilanderas.
Francisco Goya painted during a historical period that included the Spanish Independence War, the fights between liberals and absolutists, and the rise of contemporary nations-states.
Joaquín Sorolla is a well-known modern Impressionist painter. There are many important Spanish painters belonging to the Modernist art movement, including Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Juan Gris and Joan Miró.

Sculpture
The Plateresque style extended from beginnings of the 16th century until the last third of the century and its stylistic influence pervaded the works of all great Spanish artists of the time. Alonso Berruguete (Valladolid School) is called the "Prince of Spanish sculpture". His main works were the upper stalls of the choir of the Cathedral of Toledo, the tomb of Cardinal Tavera in the same Cathedral, and the altarpiece of the Visitation in the church of Santa Úrsula in the same locality. Other notable sculptors were Bartolomé Ordóñez, Diego de Siloé, Juan de Juni and Damián Forment.
There were two Schools: the Seville School, to which Juan Martínez Montañés belonged, whose most celebrated works are the Crucifix in the Cathedral of Seville, another in Vergara, and a Saint John; and the Granada School, to which Alonso Cano belonged, to whom an Immaculate Conception and a Virgin of Rosary are attributed.
Other notable Andalusian Baroque sculptors were Pedro de Mena, Pedro Roldán and his daughter Luisa Roldán, Juan de Mesa and Pedro Duque Cornejo. In the 20th century the most important Spanish sculptors were Julio González, Pablo Gargallo, Eduardo Chillida, and Pablo Serrano.

Architecture
Earth and gypsum are very common materials of the traditional vernacular architecture in Spain (particularly in the East of the country, where most of the deposits of gypsum are located). Due to its historical and geographical diversity, Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences. Fine examples of Islamicate architecture, belonging to the Western Islamic tradition, were built in the Middle Ages in places such as Córdoba, Seville, or Granada. Similarly to the Maghreb, stucco decoration in Al-Andalus became an architectural stylemark in the high Middle Ages.
Simultaneously, the Christian kingdoms also developed their own styles; developing a pre-Romanesque style when isolated from contemporary mainstream European architectural influences during the earlier Middle Ages, they later integrated the Romanesque and Gothic streams. The Gothic style resulted in numerous instances of Gothic architecture being built throughout the entire territory. The so-called Mudéjar style came to designate works by Muslims, Christians and Jews in lands conquered from Muslims.
The arrival of Modernism produced much of the architecture of the 20th century. An influential style centred in Barcelona, known as modernisme, produced a number of important architects, most notably Antoni Gaudí. The International style was led by groups like GATEPAC. Spain is currently experiencing a revolution in contemporary architecture and Spanish architects like Rafael Moneo, Santiago Calatrava, and Ricardo Bofill (as well as others) have gained worldwide renown.

Cinema
After the first projection of a cinematographer in Spain by 1896, cinema developed in the following years, with Barcelona becoming the largest production hub in the country (as well as a major European hub) on the eve of the World War I. The conflict offered the Spanish industry of silent films an opportunity for further growth. Local studios for sound films were created in 1932. The government imposition of dubbing of foreign films in 1941 accustomed Spanish audiences to watching dubbed films.
Spanish cinema has achieved major international success including Oscars for films such as Pan's Labyrinth and Volver. Distinct exploitation genres that flourished in the second half of the 20th century include the Fantaterror, the cine quinqui and the so-called Cine de destape films. As of 2021, the festivals of San Sebastián and Málaga are ranked among the top cultural initiatives in the country.

Music and dance
Spanish music is often considered abroad to be synonymous with flamenco, a West Andalusian musical genre, which is not widespread outside that region. Various regional styles of folk music abound. Pop, rock, hip hop and heavy metal are also popular.
In the field of classical music, Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Albéniz, Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as Plácido Domingo, José Carreras, Montserrat Caballé, Alicia de Larrocha, Alfredo Kraus, Pablo Casals, Ricardo Viñes, José Iturbi, Pablo de Sarasate, Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza. In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras, including the Orquestra Simfònica de Barcelona, Orquesta Nacional de España and the Orquesta Sinfónica de Madrid. Major opera houses include the Teatro Real, the Gran Teatre del Liceu, Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sofía.
Thousands of music fans also travel to Spain each year for internationally recognised summer music festivals Sónar which features pop and techno acts, and Benicàssim which tends to feature alternative rock and dance acts. The Vitoria-Gasteiz jazz festival is a notable jazz festival. One of the most popular traditional musical instruments, the guitar, originated in Spain. Typical of the north are the traditional bag pipers or gaiteros, mainly in Asturias and Galicia.

Cuisine
Spanish cuisine consists of a great variety of dishes which stem from differences in geography, culture and climate. It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep Mediterranean roots. Spain's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine. In particular, three main divisions are easily identified:
Mediterranean Spain – coastal regions, from Catalonia to Andalusia – heavy use of seafood, such as pescaíto frito (fried fish); cold soups like gazpacho; and many rice-based dishes like paella from Valencia and arròs negre (black rice) from Catalonia.
Inner Spain – Castile – hot, thick soups such as the bread and garlic-based Castilian soup, along with substantial stews such as cocido madrileño. Food is traditionally preserved by salting, such as Spanish ham, or immersed in olive oil, such as Manchego cheese.
Atlantic Spain – the Northern coast, including Asturian, Basque, Cantabrian and Galician cuisine – vegetable and fish-based stews like caldo gallego and marmitako. Also, the lightly cured lacón ham. The best known cuisine of the northern countries often rely on ocean seafood, as in the Basque-style cod, albacore or anchovy or the Galician octopus-based polbo á feira and shellfish dishes.

Sport
While varieties of football have been played in Spain as far back as Roman times, sport in Spain has been dominated by football since the early 20th century. Real Madrid CF and FC Barcelona are two of the most successful football clubs in the world. The country's national men's football team won the UEFA European Championship in 1964, 2008, 2012 and 2024 and the FIFA World Cup in 2010 and 2026, and is the first team ever to win three back-to-back major international tournaments. Spain's women's national team were champions of the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup, becoming one of only five nations to win the Women's World Cup. Barcelona Femení has won a record number of domestic trophies.
Basketball, tennis—where players like Rafa Nadal and Carlos Alcaraz stand out—, cycling, handball, futsal, motorcycling and, lately, Formula One also can boast of Spanish champions. Today, Spain is a major world sports powerhouse, especially since the 1992 Summer Olympics and Paralympics that were hosted in Barcelona, which stimulated a great deal of interest in sports in the country. The tourism industry has led to an improvement in sports infrastructure, especially for water sports, golf and skiing. In their respective regions, the traditional games of Basque pelota and Valencian pilota are both popular.

Public holidays and festivals
Public holidays celebrated in Spain include a mix of religious (Roman Catholic), national and local observances. Each municipality is allowed to declare a maximum of 14 public holidays per year; up to nine of these are chosen by the national government and at least two are chosen locally. Spain's National Day (Fiesta Nacional de España) is celebrated on 12 October.
There are many festivals and festivities in Spain. One of the most famous is San Fermín, in Pamplona. Its most famous event is the encierro, or the running of the bulls. It has become one of the most internationally renowned fiestas in Spain, with over 1,000,000 people attending every year.
Other festivals include La Tomatina tomato festival in Buñol, Valencia, the carnivals in the Canary Islands, the Falles in Valencia or the Holy Week in Andalusia and Castile and León.

Media
In Spain, TV is the main source of news and satellite and cable are popular digital platforms. Home-produced dramas, reality shows and long-running soap operas are staple fare on primetime TV. Regional TV networks are operated by their respective governments and there are many local stations. The biggest TV provider is Movistar+, owned by telecom firm Telefónica.
On 11 March 2026, Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez announced that he will launch HODIO, a tool which will allow the government to systematically track the presence, amplification and impact of hate speech online, to measure hate speech on digital platforms as part of a broader strategy to increase oversight of social media companies.

See also
Crime in Spain
Law enforcement in Spain
Outline of Spain

Notes
References
Works cited
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81083-1.
"The Spanish Constitution" (PDF). Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado. 1978. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2022.
Ramallo, Fernando (2018). "17. Linguistic diversity in Spain". In Ayres-Bennett, Wendy; Carruthers, Janice (eds.). Manual of Romance Sociolinguistics. De Gruyter. pp. 462–493. doi:10.1515/9783110365955-018. ISBN 978-3-11-036595-5. S2CID 158999790.

Further reading
Callaghan O.F. Joseph. A History of Medieval Spain. Cornell University Press 1983.
Carr, Raymond, ed. Spain: a history. Oxford University Press, US, 2000.
Marcos, F. Javier (2006). La Sierra de Atapuerca y el Valle del Arlanzón. Patrones de asentamiento prehistóricos. Editorial Dossoles. Burgos, Spain. ISBN 978-84-96606-28-9.
Marcos, F. Javier (2016). La Prehistoria Reciente del entorno de la Sierra de Atapuerca (Burgos, España). British Archaeological Reports (Oxford, U.K.), BAR International Series 2798. ISBN 978-1-4073-1519-5.
Frank, Waldo D. Virgin Spain: Scenes from the Spiritual Drama of a Great People NYC: Boni & Liveright, 1926.

External links

Spain. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Spain from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Spain from the BBC News
Key Development Forecasts for Spain from International Futures
Government
E-Government portal for Spain
Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Spain
 Geographic data related to Spain at OpenStreetMap
Tourism
Official tourism portal for Spain

## Tourism in Spain
Tourism in Spain is a major component of the national economy. In 2024, domestic and international tourism combined accounted for 12.6% of Spain’s GDP (200,699 million euros). The characteristic tourism branches generated more than 2.7 million jobs, representing 12.3% of total employment. The international tourist expenditure in 2024 was around 126 billion euros. Since 1959, the tourism industry has become one of the key sectors of the Spanish economy. The country has been a popular destination for summer holidays, especially with large numbers of tourists from the United Kingdom, Ireland, France, Germany, Italy, the Benelux, and the United States, among others. Accordingly, Spain's foreign tourist industry has grown into the second-biggest in the world.

In 2025, Spain was the second most visited country in the world, recording around 97 million international tourists, which marked the eighth consecutive year of record-breaking numbers. 
Due to the coronavirus pandemic in 2020, only 18.9 million tourists visited Spain. These dramatic figures were devastating for the tourism sector and were a reflection of what would become the worst year for this industry, in terms of income, ever recorded. However, by 2022 the industry had mostly recovered, with 71,659,281 international tourists and increasing.
Spain ranks first among 140 countries in the biannual Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index published by the World Economic Forum in 2019, matching the top position already achieved in 2017 and 2015. The World Tourism Organization has its headquarters in Madrid.

Statistics
Arrivals
Most visitors arriving to Spain on a short-term basis were from the following countries:

Autonomous Community by nights spent in hotel
Most visited cities
In 2024, the most visited cities were:

Transport
Spain's national airline is Iberia, but the country can be flown into on many international passenger airlines and charter airlines.
Tourists also arrive in Spain by road, rail and over the water. Spanish freeways interconnecting the touristic cities are also linked with the French freeway network across the Pyrenees. The main train operator is Renfe, including AVE (Spanish high speed train) or Talgo intercity services. Spain's high-speed rail link is the largest in Europe and second largest in the world after China. There is also a number of high-end tourism oriented hotel-train services, such as Transcantábrico.

Summer resorts and beaches
This type of tourism was the first to be developed in Spain, and today, generates the most income for the Spanish economy.
The mild climate during the whole year and the extensive sandy beaches of the Mediterranean and Atlantic Ocean as well as of its two archipelagoes (the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands respectively) have been attracting tourists from Northern Europe for decades. The leading source markets of Spanish beach tourism are the UK (around 24% of the total arrivals in Spain in recent years), Germany and France (around 15-16% each), followed by Scandinavia and Italy (around 7% each) and the Netherlands (around 5%).
The most popular Spanish mainland coasts are on its Mediterranean side, and include, from north to south clockwise:

The Costa Brava, the Costa Daurada and the Costa del Maresme, in the Autonomous Community of Catalonia, very popular with visitors from France as well as inland Spain, with notable resorts like Salou and the city of Barcelona.
The Costa Blanca, (one of the most developed coastal areas of Spain, extremely popular for tourists from the United Kingdom and Germany, with Benidorm as the leading summer city of Spain) and the Costa del Azahar are both in the Valencian Community.
The Costa Cálida in the Region of Murcia and the Mar Menor, a lagoon by the Mediterranean sea.
The Costa de Almería, the Costa Tropical, the Costa del Sol and the Costa de la Luz, all in the community of Andalusia. Some of the summer destinations here are renowned worldwide, such as Marbella in Málaga Province or Sotogrande in Cádiz province, both destinations for tourists and summer residents with big purchasing power. The city of Málaga is a notable Costa del Sol destination and also one of the largest harbours in Spain and frequented by cruise ships.

Spain's two archipelagoes, the Balearic Islands off the mainland coast in the Mediterranean and the volcanic Canary Islands in the Atlantic, are also both very popular destinations with Spaniards and Europeans.

In addition to the summer tourism, other modalities like cultural and monumental tourism congresses, sport or fun tourism have been developed in these areas, including such famous cities as Barcelona and Valencia, the biggest harbours of the Spanish Mediterranean coast.
Many coastal or island places also have great ecological and natural importance. Theme Parks like Terra Mítica, Tibidabo Amusement Park, Tivoli World and the resort PortAventura World or diverse water-fun parks are also popular.
In 2014 Spain broke its own record of blue flag beaches, achieving 681 flags and becoming the leader in the Northern Hemisphere. Spain is also the leader in blue flags for marinas.

Cultural tourism, business tourism
As a crossroads of several civilisations, Spain offers a number of historical cities and towns. Major destinations include Spain's two largest cities: Madrid and Barcelona, which stand as two of the leading city destinations in Europe. Both offer a matchless number of attractions and their importance in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science, sports and arts contribute to their status as two of the world's major global cities.
Fifteen Spanish cities have been declared World Heritage Cities by the UNESCO:
Alcalá de Henares, Ávila, Baeza, Cáceres, Córdoba, Cuenca, Ibiza, Mérida, Salamanca, San Cristóbal de La Laguna, Santiago de Compostela, Segovia, Tarragona, Toledo and Úbeda . As of October 2016, Spain has 45 total sites inscribed on the list, third only to Italy (51) and China (50). Of these 45 sites, 40 are cultural, 3 are natural, and 2 are mixed (meeting both cultural and natural criteria), as determined by the organization's selection criteria.
Other first-class destinations are Seville, Granada, Santander, Oviedo, Gijón, Bilbao and San Sebastián. All of them with historical landmarks and a lively cultural agenda.

Student programs
Besides hosting some of the most renowned business schools in the world such as IE Business School, ESADE or IESE Business School, Spain is a popular destination for students from abroad. In particular, during the 2010–11 academic year Spain was the European country receiving the most Erasmus Programme students.

Religion
Spain is an important place for Catholicism. In fact, some of the holiest places for the Catholic Church are in Spain: city of Santiago de Compostela in Galicia (North-West Spain), the third holiest place after the Vatican City in Rome and Jerusalem. It is also the terminus of the Way of Saint James. Santo Toribio de Liébana, Cantabria (also in North Spain) is the fourth, followed by Caravaca de la Cruz at the South-East, (fifth holiest place). These places attract pilgrims and tourists from all over the world.
Religion also has found its artistic expression through the popular Holy Week processions, which become important in almost every town, Seville arguably holds some of the most elaborate processions for Holy Week.

Festivals
Most festivals turn around patron saints, legends, local customs and folklore. Among the most singular ones stand out the Seville Fair (Feria de Abril in Spanish), the Romería de El Rocío in Almonte, Huelva, the world-famous Festival of San Fermin in Pamplona, the Falles in Valencia, the Tomatina in Buñol, Valencia and the Fiestas del Pilar in Zaragoza.
The Carnival is also popular all over Spain, but especially in the Canary Islands (Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife) and Cádiz. 
There are renowned movie festivals all over the country, the most recognizable being the famous San Sebastián International Film Festival, the Málaga Film Festival, the Seminci (Valladolid International Film Festival), the Mostra de Valencia and the Sitges Film Festival, the world's foremost international festival specializing in fantasy and horror movies. Music festivals includes the Sónar, the FIB, the Festimad, the Primavera Sound, the Bilbao BBK Live, the Monegros Desert Festival and the SOS 4.8 Festival.
Several cities have hosted international events: the 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition, the 1929 Barcelona International Exposition, the 1992 Summer Olympics, all in Barcelona, the Universal fair of 1992 in Seville, the 2007 America's Cup in Valencia, and the Expo 2008 in Zaragoza. In addition, some Spanish cities have been or will be European Capital of Culture: Madrid in 1992; Santiago de Compostela in 2000, Salamanca in 2002, and San Sebastián in 2016.

Nightlife
The nightlife in Spain is very attractive to both tourists and locals. Spain is known to have some of the best nightlife in the world. Big cities such as Madrid and Barcelona are favorites amongst the large and popular discothèques. For instance, Madrid is known as the number one party city for clubs such as Pacha and Kapital (seven floors), and Barcelona is famous for Opium and Sutton famous clubs. The discothèques in Spain are open until hours such as 7am. The Baleraric Islands, such as Ibiza and Mallorca, are known to be major party destinations, as well as favored summer resort and in Andalusia, Málaga, specially the area of the Costa del Sol. Madrid is reputed to have a "vibrant nightlife".
Ibiza is a relatively small island and its cities have become world-famous for their associations with tourism, nightlife, and the electronic music the island has originated. Ibiza has garnered the reputation as the "Party Capital of the world". It is well known for its summer club scene which attracts very large numbers of tourists, but the island's government and the Spanish Tourist Office have controversially been working to promote more family-oriented tourism. Noted clubs include Space, Privilege, Amnesia, Ushuaïa, Pacha, DC10, Eden, and Es Paradis. Ibiza is also home to the legendary "port" in Ibiza Town, a popular stop for many tourists and now a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Mallorca is an island located in the Mediterranean Sea. It is the largest island in the Balearic Islands archipelago in Spain.
The capital of the island, Palma, is also the capital of the autonomous community of the Balearic Islands. The Cabrera Archipelago is administratively grouped with Mallorca (in the municipality of Palma). The anthem of Mallorca is La Balanguera.
Like the other Balearic Islands of Menorca, Ibiza, and Formentera, the island is an extremely popular holiday destination, particularly for tourists from Germany, Ireland, Poland, the Scandinavian countries, and the United Kingdom. The name derives from Latin insula maior, "larger island"; later Maiorica, "the larger one" in comparison to Menorca, "the smaller one".

Winter tourism
Spain is a generally mountainous country, with well-known ski resorts located in several parts of the country, including the Pyrenees, the Sistema Central, the Sistema Ibérico and Sierra Nevada.
For the most part, the main crest forms a massive divider between France and Spain, with the tiny country of Andorra sandwiched in between. The Crown of Aragon and the Kingdom of Navarre have historically extended on both sides of the mountain range, with small northern portions now in France and much larger southern parts now in Spain.
Sierra Nevada in Spain is a popular tourist destination, as its high peaks make skiing possible in one of Europe's most southerly ski resorts, in an area along the Mediterranean Sea predominantly known for its warm temperatures and abundant sunshine. At its foothills is found the city of Granada and, a little further, Almería and Málaga.
Parts of the range have been included in the Sierra Nevada National Park. The range has also been declared a biosphere reserve. The Sierra Nevada Observatory is located on the northern slopes at an elevation of 2,896 metres (9,501 ft). The Sierra Nevada was formed during the Alpine Orogeny, a mountain-building event that also formed the European Alps to the east and the Atlas Mountains of northern Africa across the Mediterranean Sea to the south. The Sierra as observed today formed during the Paleogene and Neogene Periods (66 to 1.8 million years ago) from the collision of the African and Eurasian continental plates.

Nature and rural tourism
Spain is the second largest country in the European Union. Its latitude puts part of the country in direct contact with the typical southern end of the Atlantic polar jet. Hence, Spain's geographical position allows for Atlantic fronts typically affecting its western and northern part whereas a Mediterranean influenced climate is generally prevalent in its eastern and southern parts, with transition climates linking both main bioclimatic regions. Additionally the presence of several mountain ranges ultimately shape the diverse landscape of Spain. Another remarkable feature of the country is its vast coast, as a result of being in a Peninsula; moreover, there is the coast of the two Spanish archipelagos: the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands.
To date, Spain has a total of 15 National Parks, of which 10 are on the mainland, 1 in the Balearic Islands and 4 in the Canary Islands. Spain's most visited National Park is the Teide National Park in the Canary Islands, with 3,142,148 visitors in 2007 and crowned with the third largest Volcano in the world from its base, the Teide, with 3,718 meters above the sea level (also the highest point in Spain). The Teide also has the distinction of being the most visited national park in Europe and second in the world.
On top of that, by 2016 Spain is home to 48 biosphere reserves, covering 5.5 million hectares, almost 11% of the country, making Spain the world leader of such protected areas

Art and culture
Museums in Madrid
Madrid is considered one of the top European destinations concerning art museums. Best known is the Golden Triangle of Art, located along the Paseo del Prado and comprising three museums. The most famous one is the Museo del Prado, known for such highlights as Diego Velázquez's Las Meninas and Francisco de Goya's La maja vestida and La maja desnuda. The other two museums are the Thyssen Bornemisza Museum, established from a mixed private collection, and the Reina Sofia Museum, where Pablo Picasso's Guernica hangs, returning to Spain from New York after more than two decades.
The Museo del Prado is a museum and art gallery that features one of the world's finest collections of European art, from the 12th century to the early 19th century, based on the former Spanish Royal Collection. The collection currently comprises around 7,600 paintings, 1,000 sculptures, 4,800 prints and 8,200 drawings, in addition to a large number of works of art and historic documents. El Prado is one of the most visited museums in the world, and it is considered to be among the greatest museums of art. It has the best collection of paintings by Goya, Velázquez, El Greco, Patinir, José de Ribera, and other Spanish artists, as well as major collections of Rubens, Titian, Hieronymus Bosch, Rogier van der Weyden, Raphael, Tintoretto, Veronese, Caravaggio, Van Dyck, Albrecht Dürer, Claude Lorrain, Murillo and Zurbarán, among others.

The Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía (MNCARS) is the Spain's national museum of 20th-century art. The museum is mainly dedicated to Spanish art. Highlights of the museum include excellent collections of Spain's greatest 20th-century masters, Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Joan Miró, Juan Gris and Julio González. Certainly the most famous masterpiece in the museum is Picasso's painting Guernica. The Reina Sofía also hosts a free-access library specializing in art, with a collection of over 100,000 books, over 3,500 sound recordings and almost 1,000 videos.

The Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum is an art museum that fills the historical gaps in its counterparts' collections: in the Prado's case this includes Early Italian painting and works from the English, Dutch and German schools, while in the case of the Reina Sofia the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection, once the second largest private collection in the world after the British Royal Collection, includes Impressionists, Expressionists, and European and American paintings from the second half of the 20th century, with over 1,600 paintings.
The Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando currently functions as a museum and gallery that houses a fine art collection of paintings from the 15th to 20th centuries: Giovanni Bellini, Correggio, Rubens, Zurbarán, Murillo, Goya, Juan Gris, Pablo Serrano. The academy is also the headquarters of the Madrid Academy of Art. Francisco Goya was once one of the academy's directors, and, its alumni include Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Antonio López García, Juan Luna, and Fernando Botero.

The Royal Palace of Madrid is the official residence of Felipe VI of Spain, but he uses it only for official acts. It is a baroque palace full of artworks and one of the largest European Royal Palaces, which is characterized by its luxurious rooms and its rich collections of armors and weapons, pharmaceutical, silverware, watches, paintings, tapestries and the most comprehensive collection of Stradivarius in the world

The National Archaeological Museum of Spain collection includes, among others, Pre-historic, Celtic, Iberian, Greek and Roman antiquities and medieval (Visigothic, Muslim and Christian) objects. Highlights include a replica of the Altamira cave (the first cave in which prehistoric cave paintings were discovered), Lady of Elche (an enigmatic polychrome stone bust), Lady of Baza (a famous example of Iberian sculpture), Biche of Balazote (an Iberian sculpture) and Treasure of Guarrazar (a treasure that represents the best surviving group of Early Medieval Christian votive offerings and the high point of Visigothic goldsmith's work).
The Museum of the Americas is a national museum that holds artistic, archaeological and ethnographic collections from the whole Americas, ranging from the Paleolithic period to the present day. The permanent exhibit is divided into five major thematical areas: an awareness of the Americas, the reality of the Americas, society, religion and communication.

The National Museum of Natural Sciences is the National Museum of Natural History of Spain. The research departments of the museum are: Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Ecology, Paleobiology, Vulcanology and Geology.
The Naval Museum is managed by the Ministry of Defence. The Museum's mission is to acquire, preserve, investigate, report and display for study, education and contemplation, parts, sets and collections of historical, artistic, scientific and technical related to naval activity in order to disseminate the story sea of Spain; to help illustrate, highlight and preserve their traditions and promote national maritime awareness.

The Monastery of Las Descalzas Reales resides in the former palace of King Charles I of Spain and Isabel of Portugal. Their daughter, Joan of Austria, founded this convent of nuns of the Poor Clare order in 1559. Throughout the remainder of the 16th century and into the 17th century, the convent attracted young widowed or spinster noblewomen. Each woman brought with her a dowry. The riches quickly piled up, and the convent became one of the richest convents in all of Europe. It has many works of Renaissance and Baroque art, including a recumbent Christ by Gaspar Becerra, a staircase whose paintings were painted by unknown author (perhaps Velázquez) and they are considered of the masterpieces of Spanish illusionist painting, and Brussels tapestries inspired by paintings of Rubens.
The Museum of Lázaro Galdiano houses an encyclopedic collection specializing in decorative arts.
Apart from paintings and sculptures it displays 10th-century Byzantine enamel; Arab and Byzantine ivory chests; Hellenistic, Roman, medieval, renaissance, baroque and romantic jewelry; Pisanello and Pompeo Leoni medals; Spanish and Italian ceramics; Italian and Arab clothes and a collection of weapons including the sword of Pope Innocent VIII.
The Museo Nacional de Artes Decorativas (National Museum of Decorative Arts) is one of the oldest museums in the city. It illustrates the evolution of the called "minor arts" (furniture, ceramics and glass, textile, etc.). Its 60 rooms expones 15,000 objects, of the approximate 40,000 which it has.
The Museo Nacional del Romanticismo (National Museum of Romanticism) contains a large collection of artefacts and art, focusing on daily life and customs of the 19th century, with special attention to the aesthetics about Romanticism.
The Museo Cerralbo houses a private collection of ancient works of art, artifacts and other antiquities collected by Enrique de Aguilera y Gamboa, XVII Cerralbo Marquis.
The National Museum of Anthropology provides an overview of the different cultures in the world, with objects and human remains from around the world, highlighting a Guanche mummy of the island of Tenerife.

The Museo Sorolla is located in the building in which the Valencian Impressionist painter had his home and workshop. The collection includes, in addition to numerous works of Joaquín Sorolla, a large number of objects that possessed the artist, including sculptures by Auguste Rodin.
CaixaForum Madrid is a post-modern art gallery in the centre of Madrid. It is sponsored by the Catalan-Balearic bank la Caixa and located next to the Salón del Prado. Although the CaixaForum is a modern building, it also exhibits retrospectives of artists from earlier time periods and has evolved into one of the most visited museums in Madrid. It was constructed by the Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron from 2001 to 2007, which combined an old unused industrial building and hollowed it out at the base and inside and placed on top further floors which are encased with rusted steel. Next to it is an art installation of green plants growing on the wall of the neighbouring house by French botanist Patrick Blanc. The red of the top floors with the green of the wall next to it form a contrast. The green is in reflection of the neighbouring Royal Botanical Gardens.
Other art galleries and museums in Madrid include:

Museums in Barcelona
This is a list of museums in Barcelona (Catalonia) and in its surrounding metropolitan area.

Archaeology Museum of Barcelona (MAC)
Museu d'Art Contemporani de Barcelona (MACBA)
Museu del Modernisme Català MMCAT
CaixaForum Barcelona
Casa Àsia
Centre d'Art Santa Mònica (CASM)
Centre de Cultura Contemporània de Barcelona (CCCB)
Cosmocaixa Barcelona (former Museu de la Ciència de Barcelona)
Espai Gaudí (La Pedrera)
Fundació Antoni Tàpies
Olympic and Sports Museum Joan Antoni Samaranch
Fundació Joan Miró
Fundació Suñol
FC Barcelona Museum
Gracia Arts Project
Royal Palace of Pedralbes
Museu de Ceràmica
Museu de les Arts Decoratives
Museu Tèxtil i d'Indumentària
Moco Museum Barcelona
Museu d'Autòmates
Museu Barbier-Mueller d'Art Precolombí
Museu del Calçat
Museu de Cera de Barcelona
Museum of Natural Sciences of Barcelona
Museum of Natural Sciences of Barcelona (the main exhibition site, at the Forum Building)
Martorell Museum (the historical site where the Museum of Natural Sciences of Barcelona was founded in 1882, but contained the Geology Museum from 1924 to 2010)
Laboratori de Natura, at the Castle of the Three Dragons (from 1920 to 2010: Zoology Museum)
Botanical garden of Barcelona
Historical Botanical Garden of Barcelona
Museu del Clavegueram
Museu del Còmic i la Il·lustració
Egyptian Museum of Barcelona
Museu de l'Eròtica de Barcelona
Museu Etnològic de Barcelona
Museu Frederic Marès
Museu Gaudí
Museu d'Història de Catalunya
Museu d'Història de la Ciutat
Centre d'Interpretació del Park Güell
Museu Marítim
Museu Militar de Barcelona (closed May 2009)
Museu de la Música de Barcelona
National Art Museum of Catalonia (MNAC)
Museu del Perfum - Fundació Planas Giralt
Museu Picasso
Museu Taurí
Museu de la Xocolata
Palau de la Virreina
Palau Robert
Sala Ciutat
Sagrada Familia

Other major museums in Spain
Bilbao Fine Arts Museum
Carmen Thyssen Museum in Málaga
City of Arts and Sciences in Valencia
Dalí Theatre and Museum in Figueres
Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
IVAM (Valencia)
Museo Picasso Málaga
Centro Pompidou Málaga
Museu de Belles Arts de València
National Museum of Sculpture in Valladolid
Museum of Fine Arts of Seville

Impact of COVID-19
In early 2020, the country halted its tourism industry following the spread of COVID-19. Spain reopened to fully vaccinated travellers from around the world on 7 June 2021; however, due to the relatively late announcement of the reopening, the initial increase in visitors was gradual.

See also
Paradores
Spanish cuisine
12 Treasures of Spain

References
External links

Spanish Tourism Official Website in English
Tourism in Catalonia
 Media related to Tourism in Spain at Wikimedia Commons

## Culture of Spain
The culture of Spain is influenced by its Western origin, its interaction with other cultures in Europe, its historically Catholic religious tradition, and the varied national and regional identities within the country. It encompasses literature, music, visual arts, cuisine as well as contemporary customs, beliefs, institutions, and social norms. Beyond Spain, Spanish culture is considered the historical basis of Hispanic American culture and an important influence on Filipino culture.

History
The ancient peoples of Spain included Celts, Iberians, Celtiberians, Tartessians, Vascones, as well as Phoenician, Greek and Carthaginian colonies. From an early age, It was entirely conquered by Rome, becoming a province of the Roman Empire (Hispania). The ancient Romans left a lasting cultural, religious, political, legal and administrative legacy in Spanish history, being today the cultural basis of modern Spain. The subsequent course of Spanish history added new elements to the country's culture and traditions.
The Visgoths established a united Hispania and kept the Latin and Christian legacy in Spain between the fall of the Roman Empire and the Early Middle Ages. Muslim influences played a significant role during the Early Middle Ages in the areas conquered by the Umayyads. However, these influences were not completely assimilated into the Spanish culture, leading to conflicts and ultimately to the Christian Reconquista ("Reconquest") that would largely shape the culture of the country. After the definitive defeat of the Muslims during the Reconquista in 1492, Spain became again an entirely unified Roman Catholic country. In addition, the nation's history and its Mediterranean and Atlantic environment have played a significant role in shaping its culture, and also in shaping other cultures, such as the culture of Latin America through the colonization of the Americas.
As of 2024, around 85% of modern Spanish vocabulary is derived from Latin, as is also the case in the other languages of Spain, with the exception of Basque. Ancient Greek has also contributed substantially to Spanish vocabulary, especially through Latin. Spanish also features a sizeable vocabulary from medieval Arabic, from other Romance languages, and minor of influences from Basque and Celtic languages, among others.
Spain has one of the highest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in the world.

Literature
The term "Spanish literature" refers to literature written in the Spanish language, including literature composed by Spanish and Latin American writers. It may include Spanish poetry, prose, and novels.

Spanish literature is the name given to the literary works written in Spain throughout time, and those by Spanish authors worldwide. Due to historic, geographic, and generational diversity, Spanish literature has a great number of influences and is very diverse. Some major movements can be identified within it.
Highlights include the Cantar de Mio Cid, the oldest preserved Spanish cantar de gesta. It is written in medieval Spanish, the ancestor of modern Spanish.
La Celestina is a book published anonymously by Fernando de Rojas in 1499. This book is considered to be one of the greatest in Spanish literature, and traditionally marks the end of medieval literature and the beginning of the literary renaissance in Spain.
Besides its importance in the Spanish literature of the Golden Centuries, Lazarillo de Tormes is credited with founding a literary genre, the picaresque novel, so called from Spanish pícaro, meaning "rogue" or "rascal". In these novels, the adventures of the pícaro expose injustice while simultaneously amusing the reader.
Published by Miguel de Cervantes in two volumes a decade apart, Don Quixote is the most influential work of literature to emerge from the Spanish Golden Age and perhaps the entire Spanish literary canon. As a founding work of modern Western literature, it regularly appears at or near the top of lists of the greatest works of fiction ever published.

Painting and sculpture
Spain's greatest painters during the Spanish Golden Age period included El Greco, Bartolomé Esteban Murillo, Diego Velázquez, and Francisco Goya, who became world-renowned artists between the period of the 17th century to 19th century also in early parts of the 20th century. However, Spain's best known artist since the 20th century has been Pablo Picasso, who is known for his abstract sculptures, drawings, graphics, and ceramics in addition to his paintings. Other leading artists include Salvador Dalí, Juan Gris, Joan Miró, and Antoni Tàpies.

Architecture
During the Prehistoric period, the megalithic Iberian and Celtic architectures developed. Through the Roman period, both urban development (ex. the Emerita Augusta) and construction projects ( the Aqueduct of Segovia) flourished. After the pre-Romanesque period, in the architecture of Al-Andalus, important contributions were made by the Caliphate of Córdoba (the Great Mosque of Córdoba), the Taifas (Aljafería, in Zaragoza), the Almoravids and Almohads (La Giralda, Seville), and the Nasrid of the Kingdom of Granada (Alhambra, Generalife).
Later, several currents appear: Mudéjar (the Alcázar of Seville), the Romanesque period (the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela), the Gothic period (the Cathedrals of Burgos, León and Toledo), the Renaissance (Palace of Charles V in Granada), the Baroque period (Granada Cathedral), the Spanish colonial architecture, and Neoclassical style (ex. the Museo del Prado) are the most significant. In the 19th century eclecticism and regionalism, the Neo-Mudéjar style and glass architecture bloom. In the 20th century, the Catalan Modernisme (La Sagrada Família by Gaudí), modernist architecture, and contemporary architecture germinated.

Cinema
In recent years, Spanish cinema, including within Spain and Spanish filmmakers abroad, has achieved high marks of recognition as a result of its creative and technical excellence. In the long history of Spanish cinema, the great filmmaker Luis Buñuel was the first to achieve universal recognition, followed by Pedro Almodóvar in the 1980s. Spanish cinema has also seen international success over the years with films by directors like Segundo de Chomón, Florián Rey, Luis García Berlanga, Carlos Saura, Julio Medem and Alejandro Amenábar. Woody Allen, upon receiving the prestigious Prince of Asturias Award in 2002 in Oviedo remarked: "when I left New York, the most exciting film in the city at the time was Spanish, Pedro Almodóvar's one. I hope that Europeans will continue to lead the way in filmmaking because at the moment not much is coming from the United States."
Non-directors have obtained less international notability. Only the cinematographer Néstor Almendros, the actress Penélope Cruz and the actors Fernando Rey, Antonio Banderas, Javier Bardem and Fernando Fernán Gómez have obtained some recognition outside of Spain. Mexican actor Gael García Bernal has also recently received international attention in films by Spanish directors.
Today, only 10 to 20% of box office receipts in Spain are generated by domestic films, a situation that repeats itself in many nations of Europe and the Americas. The Spanish government has therefore implemented various measures aimed at supporting local film production and movie theaters, which include the assurance of funding from the main national television stations. The trend is being reversed with the recent screening of mega productions such as the €30 million film Alatriste (starring Viggo Mortensen), the Academy Award-winning Spanish/Mexican film Pan's Labyrinth (El Laberinto del Fauno), Volver (starring Penélope Cruz), and Los Borgia (€10 million), all of them hit blockbusters in Spain.
Another aspect of Spanish cinema mostly unknown to the general public is the appearance of English-language Spanish films such as The Machinist (starring Christian Bale), The Others (starring Nicole Kidman), Basic Instinct 2 (starring Sharon Stone), and Miloš Forman's Goya's Ghosts (starring Javier Bardem and Natalie Portman). All of these films were produced by Spanish firms.

Languages
Spain is a multilingual country with a relatively complex sociolinguistic situation. According to the article 3 of the 1978 Constitution, Spanish is the official language of the State, while other languages may also be official in autonomous communities according to the latter's regional statutes, as it is the case with Catalan/Valencian, Basque and Galician. Spanish, a Romance language, has become the hegemonic language in Spain. It has also become a global language (with the majority of its speakers now located outside of Spain, most of them in Latin America) and one of six official languages of the United Nations. Its current hegemony in Spain is subtly fostered by neoliberal discourses on educational choice, flexibility and competition.
Another Romance language, Catalan is a co-official language in the autonomous communities of the Balearic Islands, Catalonia and the Valencian Community (where it is known as Valencian). It is also spoken in parts of the autonomous communities of Aragon (in La Franja) and Murcia (in El Carche). While most of the native speakers of Catalan are located in Spain, the language is also natively spoken in the microstate of Andorra and parts of Italy (Alghero) and France (Roussillon). Galician is a language of the Western Ibero-Romance branch closely related to Portuguese, spoken in the autonomous community of Galicia (where it enjoys co-officiality along Spanish) and small areas in neighbouring Asturias and Castile and León.
Aranese, a standardized form of the Pyrenean Gascon variety of the Occitan language, is spoken in the Val d'Aran in northwestern Catalonia together with Spanish and Catalan, enjoying official recognition. Other Romance languages of Spain include, Astur-Leonese, Aragonese, Extremaduran, Fala language and Quinqui jargon. Caló language, considered a mixed Romani-Romance language, is spoken by a number of Spanish Romani.
Considered to be a language isolate relative to any other known living language, Basque is a non-Indoeuropean language co-official together with Spanish in the Basque autonomous community and in the northern part of Navarre.
Regarding the Spanish autonomous cities in North Africa, the largely rural variety of vernacular Moroccan "Darija" Arabic characteristic of Jbala is spoken together with Spanish in Ceuta, whereas tamazight is spoken in Melilla in addition to Spanish.

Religion
Per data from 2022, 56% of Spaniards identify as belonging to the Roman Catholic religion; 3% identify with another religious faith, and about 39% as non-religious.

Holidays
An important Spanish holiday is "Semana Santa" (Holy Week), celebrated the week before Easter with large parades and other religious events. Spaniards also hold patronal festivals to honor their local saints in churches, cities, towns and villages. The people decorate the streets, build bonfires, set off fireworks and hold large parades, bullfights, and beauty contests.
One of the best-known Spanish celebrations is the "festival of San Fermin," which is celebrated every year in July in Pamplona. Bulls are released into the streets, while people run ahead of the animals to the bullring.

Sports
Association football is the most popular sport in Spain, with notable teams including Real Madrid and Barcelona, who rank amongst the most successful and prestigious clubs in world football. Other notable Spanish clubs include Atlético Madrid, Sevilla, Athletic Bilbao and Valencia CF. The top division of Spanish football, La Liga, has featured several of the most outstanding players of all time, such as Johan Cruyff, Diego Maradona, Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo, Ronaldinho, Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo, the latter two often being featured in debates concerning the greatest player ever. The Spain national football team have won three UEFA European Championship titles and the FIFA World Cup in 2010. Spain is one of only eight countries ever to have won the FIFA World Cup, doing so in South Africa in 2010, the first time the team had reached the final.
Various other sports are highly popular in Spain as well, including basketball, tennis, cycling, padel, and handball.

Cuisine
A significant portion of Spanish cuisine derives from the Roman tradition. The Moorish people were a strong influence in a part of Spain for many centuries. Several ingredients from the Americas were introduced to Europe through Spain during the so-called Columbian exchange, and a modern Spanish cook could not do without potatoes, tomatoes, peppers, and beans. These are some of the primary influences that have differentiated Spanish cuisine from Mediterranean cuisine, of which Spanish cuisine shares many techniques and food items.

The essential ingredient for real Spanish cooking is olive oil, as Spain produces 44% of the world's olives. However, butter or lard are also important, especially in the north.
Daily meals eaten by Spaniards in many areas of the country are still very often made traditionally by hand, from fresh ingredients bought daily from the local market. This practice is more common in the rural areas and less common in the large urban areas like Barcelona or Madrid, where supermarkets are beginning to displace the open air markets. However, even in Madrid food can be bought from the local shops; bread from the "panadería" and meat from the "carnicería".
One popular custom when going out is to be served tapas with a drink, including sherry, wine and beer. In some areas, such as Almería, Granada or Jaén in Andalusia, and Madrid, León, Salamanca or Lugo tapas are given for free with a drink and have become very well known for that reason. Almost every bar serves something edible when a drink is ordered, without charge. However many bars exist primarily to serve a purchased "tapa".
Another traditional favorite is the churro with a mug of thick hot chocolate to dip churros in. "Churrerías," or stores that serve churros, are quite common. The Chocolatería San Ginés in Madrid is especially famous as a place to stop and have some chocolate with churros, often late into the night (even dawn), after being out on the town. Often traditional Spanish singers and musicians will entertain the guests. [1]
As is true in many countries, the cuisines of Spain differ widely from one region to another, even though they all share certain common characteristics, which include:

The use of olive oil as a cooking ingredient in items such as fritters. It is also used raw.
The use of sofrito to start the preparation of many dishes.
The use of garlic and onions as major ingredients.
The custom of drinking wine during meals.
Serving bread with the vast majority of meals.
Consumption of salad, especially in the summer.
The consumption of a piece of fruit or a dairy product as dessert. Desserts such as tarts and cake are typically reserved for special occasions.

Music
Spanish folk music features important differences between regions. Flamenco is a well-known music style from Southern Spain developed mostly by Romani people.

Education
The Spanish educational system follows a highly decentralized model. In a gradual manner, most powers over education policies were transferred to the autonomous communities. The regional public administrations are thus responsible for education policies, funding and expenditure allocation.
As of 2020, the overarching educative legislation is regulated by the Ley orgánica para la mejora de la calidad educativa (LOMCE), an organic law.
Relative to the average in European countries, Spain has a low share of students in public centres in both primary (69% of students in public centres) and secondary education (68%). This is largely due to the salient role of the so-called "educación concertada", which allows for privately owned centres funded by public money.

Obligatory education
Optional education: Bachillerato
Bachillerato is usually taken if people aspire to go to college.

Common Subjects are in red
Optional Subjects are in pink
Modality Subjects are in blue
Technology Via are in yellow
Natural Sciences Via are in green
Humanities Via are in olive
Social Sciences Via are in brown
Arts Via are in beige

Cultural diplomacy
The cultural diplomacy of Spain has set European integration and Ibero-American relations among its main goals. It has used branding strategies such as the so-called Marca España. Since the 1980s, Spain has taken part in a number of "horizontal" initiatives as member of multilateral international organizations of the Ibero-American space such as the Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI, which was repurposed in 1985) and the Ibero-American General Secretariat (SEGIB).
Similarly to other European countries, Spain has used the model of cultural institute (in the case of Spain the Instituto Cervantes) as leading tool for cultural diplomacy, with common aims such as the dissemination of the country brand, cultural exchange and cooperation, and linguistic and educational promotion. The Instituto Cervantes is a non-profit organization that promotes Spanish culture.

Nationalisms and regionalisms
A strong sense of national identity exists in many autonomous communities. These communities—even those that least identify themselves as Spanish—have contributed greatly to many aspects of mainstream Spanish culture.
Most notably, the Basque Country and Catalonia have widespread nationalist sentiment. Many Basque and Catalan nationalists demand statehood for their respective territories. Basque aspirations to statehood have been a cause of violence (notably by ETA), although most Basque nationalists (like virtually all Catalan nationalists) currently seek to fulfill their aspirations peacefully.
There are also several communities where there is a mild sense of national identity (but a great sense of regional identity): Galicia, Andalusia, Asturias, Navarre (linked to Basque culture), Aragon, Balearic Islands and Valencia (the last two feeling attached to Catalan culture in different ways) each have their own version of nationalism, but generally with a smaller percentage of nationalists than in the Basque Country and Catalonia.
There is some traction in the province of León pushing to separate from Castile and León, possibly together with the provinces of Zamora and Salamanca.

Spain has a long history of tension between centralism and nationalism. The current organisation of the state into autonomous communities (similar to a federal organization) under the Spanish Constitution of 1978 is intended as a way to incorporate these communities into the state.

Historical Spanish clothing
See also
List of cultural icons of Spain
Culture
Outline of culture
Outline of Spain
Iberians
History of Spain
Music of Spain

References
External links

Official Spanish Culture Website 162,000 pages of information.
Articles about Spanish Culture
News about Spanish Culture

## Cuisine of Spain
Spanish cuisine (Spanish: cocina española) consists of the traditions and practices of Spanish cooking. It features considerable regional diversity, with significant differences in different parts of the country. The different culinary traditions in the Iberian Peninsula can be roughly categorized within the Mediterranean diet or the Atlantic diet. 
Olive oil (of which Spain is the world's largest producer) is extensively used in Spanish cuisine. It forms the base of many vegetable sauces (known in Spanish as sofritos). Herbs most commonly used include parsley, oregano, rosemary and thyme. The use of garlic has been noted as common in Spanish cooking. The most-used meats in Spanish cuisine include chicken, pork, lamb and veal. Fish and seafood are also consumed on a regular basis. Tapas and pinchos are snacks and appetizers commonly served in bars and cafes.

History
Antiquity
Authors such as Strabo wrote about the aboriginal people of Spain using nuts and acorns as staple foods. The extension of vineyards along the Mediterranean seemed to be due to the colonization of Greeks and Phoenicians, who also introduced the production of olive oil. Spain became the largest producer of olive oil in the world. The growing of crops of the so-called tríada mediterránea (the "Mediterranean triad": wheat, grapes, and olives) underpinned the staple meal products for the inhabitants of the south of the Iberian Peninsula during the Roman Era (bread, wine and oil).

Middle Ages
The Visigoths' limited but lasting contributions to Spanish cuisine included  the consumption of fermented milk products.
It is believed rice was introduced  in the 6th century by the Byzantines. After the Muslim conquest of the Iberian peninsula in the 8th century, rice cultivation was expanded by the Arabs. New irrigation techniques were brought from the Indian subcontinent led to the cultivation of crops such as sugar cane, watermelon, lemon and oranges. Other ingredients believed to have been introduced in the Iberian Peninsula during the Hispano-Muslim period include sorghum, spinach, eggplant, peach, apricot and saffron. The most famous Spanish dish, paella, uses two ingredients that were probably popularized during the Al-Andalus period: rice and saffron.

The Moors also developed the basis for the art of pastry-making and introduced escabeche, a food preservation technique relying on vinegar. Dishes like ajo blanco, alboronía, alajú, hallulla, albóndigas, mojama, arrope, were some of the many legacies of Moorish cuisine. Although Muslim religion did not allow alcoholic drinks, the consumption of wine was widespread as the Qur'anic precepts never got to overrule the preexisting traditions. There are many accounts of the "drinking chats" of Abd al-Rahman II, Abd al-Rahman III and Almanzor.
Observing kashrut regulations, the Jews and Conversos drained meat of blood and did not eat pork products. Potajes were an important part of  Jewish cuisine in the Middle Ages, most notably adafina (a local name for a Cholent dish) along with other Jewish culinary legacies in Spain. Almodrote was a Sephardic recipe in origin.
Early cookbooks in Spain include  Llibre de Sent Soví (1324) and Ruperto de Nola's Llibre de Coch (1520), both written in the Catalan language. Among the earliest cooking books in pre-modern Iberia are the Fiḍālat al-Jiwān fī Ṭayyibāt al-Ṭaʿām wa-l-Alwān by Murcia-born Ibn Razīn al-Tujībī and the anonymous Kitāb al-Ṭabikh fī al-Maghrib wa al-Andalus fī ʽAṣr al-Muwaḥḥidīn, li-muʽallif majhūl, written in Arabic.

Modern era
The arrival of Europeans in the Americas in 1492 initiated the advent of new culinary elements, such as tomatoes, potatoes, maize, bell peppers, spicy peppers, paprika, vanilla and cocoa. Spain was where chocolate was first mixed with sugar to temper its natural bitterness. Other ingredients traveled to the Americas, such as rice, grapes, olives, and many types of cereals.
Influenced by Arabic harisa, grain-based soups such as farinetes (along the Mediterranean coast) and, similarly, gachas (in the Central Plateau) were customary in Early Modern Spain.
Foreign visitors noted with disdain the Spaniards' use of olive oil and lard for cooking rather than their preferred butter. The latter was barely available and, according to the 17th-century account of Madame d'Aulnoy, on the rare occasions that it was, would come "from afar, preserved in pig's tripes and full of worms". Butter was only produced locally in places such as Galicia, Asturias and Soria, or was imported, preserved in potassium nitrate, (the so-called "Flanders' butter").
By the 18th century, many American ingredients, such as peppers and tomatoes, had been fully incorporated into Spanish cuisine. Contemporary foreign visitors, such as French ambassador Jean-François de Bourgoing, judged negatively this change happening in Spain by the late part of the century: "Spanish cooking, which they have inherited, is not generally pleasing to foreigners. Spaniards like strong condiments such as pepper, tomato sauce, hot peppers and saffron, which color or infect nearly all their dishes."
Spain was the bridge for the Columbian exchange between the rest of Europe and the New World. Many traditional Spanish dishes such as tortilla de patata (an omelette made with potatoes), would not be possible without the Columbian exchange. Gazpacho, salmorejo, and pan con tomate are made with tomatoes, which traveled from the New World to the Old World.
For most of the 19th century, the aristocracy consumed a set of dishes that was largely an imitation of French cuisine. That was the available cuisine at the time, together with the degeneration of regional cuisines. One positive foreign take on the Spanish dishes—opposing the largely negative views of other foreign commentators—was that of Richard Ford, who was fond of Spanish specialties such as sherry and ham.

Modern Spanish cuisine was gestated in the late-19th to early-20th century, with gastronomes and writers such as Mariano Pardo de Figueroa (Dr. Thebussem), José Castro y Serrano, Ángel Muro, Emilia Pardo Bazán, and Dionisio Pérez, some of whom put effort into developing the idea of a "national cuisine" recognisable by Spaniards as their own.
Keen on participating in the Spanish nation-building process, Dr. Thebussem, in an autochthonous example of culinary nationalism, proposed to the King's Chef that the olla podrida (a rustic stew typically made of meat, legumes and other vegetables) should be served at official banquets as a national dish. This could be considered an important step in the process of straying away from the French cooking paradigm, which was dominant in the 19th century in Europe. Olla podrida had been previously ridiculed in foreign (most notably French) satires.
Although the new foodscape built in opposition to the French centralist culinary model accounted for the awareness of the distinctive regional singularities, subsequent food writers in the country would continue to cope with the tension between the Spanish peripheral and centralist foodscapes.
The influential cooking book 1080 recetas de cocina by Simone Ortega (first published in 1972) became a hit in Spain, remaining as of 2019 the third best-selling book ever in the history of the country after Don Quixote and the Bible. This was not a book exclusively of Spanish traditional recipes, but also included French recipes, bringing an exotic penchant to Spanish homes.
Televised cooking shows started in the country in 1984 with Con las manos en la masa.

Meal routines
A continental-style breakfast (desayuno) may be eaten just after waking up, or before entering the workplace. Common breakfast items include coffee, milk, chocolate drink, biscuits (most notably Marie biscuits), magdalenas, toast (featuring ingredients such as oil, tomato and butter), and churros.
Due to the large time span between breakfast and lunch, it is not uncommon to halt the working schedule to take a mid-morning snack.
Lunch (el almuerzo or la comida, literally meaning "the meal"), the large midday meal in Spain, contains several courses, especially in restaurants. In some regions of Spain, the word almuerzo refers to the mid-morning snack, instead of lunch. Lunch usually starts around 2:00–2:30 p.m. and finishes around 3:00–3:30 p.m., and is usually followed by sobremesa, which refers to the table talk that Spanish people undertake. Menus are organized according to these courses and include five or six choices in each course. At home, Spanish meals contain one or two courses and a dessert. The content of this meal is usually a soup dish, salad, a meat or a fish dish, and a dessert such as fruit, yoghurt or something sweet. Tapas may also be typically served before or during lunch.
According to a 2017 report, the Spanish government has taken steps to shorten the traditional long lunch break in an effort to end the workday earlier. Most businesses shut down for two or three hours for lunch, then resume the working day until dinner time in the evening.
La cena, meaning both dinner or supper, is taken between 8:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. It typically consists of one course and dessert. Due to the large time span between lunch and dinner, an afternoon snack, la merienda, equivalent to afternoon tea, may take place at about 6:00 p.m. At merienda, people typically drink coffee, eat something sweet, or eat a sandwich or a piece of fruit.
Some country-wide staple dishes common throughout Spain include croquetas (croquettes), paella (a rice dish from the Valencian community), ensaladilla rusa (Olivier salad), gazpacho (a cold vegetable soup), and tortilla de patatas (Spanish omelette). There is a disagreement in Spanish society regarding onion as an ingredient in the Spanish omelette, often accompanied by highly opinionated views on either side.

Tapas (appetizers), served before lunch or dinner, or during them, are common. It is also common for tapas to be provided as a complimentary appetizer in bars and cafes when ordering a drink. Other common tapas include mejillones en escabeche (marinated mussels), gildas, albóndigas (meatballs), callos, torreznos, or raxo de cerdo.

Regional cuisines
Andalusia
Andalusian cuisine is twofold: rural and coastal. Of all the Spanish regions, this region uses the most olive oil in its cuisine. The Andalusian dish that has possibly achieved the most international fame is gazpacho, a cold soup made with chopped vegetables, such as tomatoes and green peppers, vinegar, water, salt, olive oil, and bread (crumbs). Other cold soups include poleá, zoque and salmorejo.
Eating olives as a snack is common. Meat dishes include flamenquín, pringá, oxtail stew, and menudo gitano (also called Andalusian tripe). Hot soups include sopa de gato (made with bread), caldillo de perro (fish soup with orange juice) and migas canas. Fish dishes include pescaíto frito, soldaditos de Pavía, and parpandúa.
Cured meats include serrano ham and ibérico ham. Typical drinks in the area include anise, wine (such as Malaga, Jerez, and Pedro Ximénez), and sherry brandy.

Aragon
Aragonese cuisine has a rural origin. One of its most famous dishes is asado de ternasco (roast lamb), in which lamb is cooked with garlic, salt, olive oil, laurel leaves, thyme, and parsley. Pork dishes are also very popular, among them, magras con tomate. Popular Aragonese recipes made with bread are migas de Pastor, migas con chocolate, regañaos, and goguera.
Legumes are very important to Aragonese dishes, but the most popular vegetables are borage and thistle, as well as the famed tomate rosa de Barbastro. Jamón de Teruel and ham from Huesca are frequently used cured meats. Among the cheeses, queso de Tronchón is notable. Fruit-based cuisine includes frutas de Aragón (English: 'fruits of Aragon', candied fruits covered in chocolate) and maraschino cherries. Melocotón con vino consists of melocotón de Calanda, a regional peach variant, infused in red wine with sugar and cinnamon.
Other sweet Aragonese specialities are trenza de Almudevar, tortas de alma, guirlache (a type of nougat), adoquín del Pilar, and Españoletas (a kind of local cookie).
The prevalence of peaches in Aragonese cuisine extends to drinks. Sopeta is a traditional beverage emerging from sliced peach, white wine and sugar. The best-known wines of Aragon are those from Cariñena, Somontano (Huesca), Calatayud, and Campo de Borja.

Asturias
Asturian cuisine has a long and rich history, deeply rooted in Celtic traditions of Atlantic Europe. One of its most famous dishes is fabada asturiana. Fabada is the traditional stew of the region, made with white beans, sausages (such as chorizo and morcilla), and pork. A well-known recipe is fabes con almejas (beans with clams). Asturian beans (fabes) can also be cooked with hare, partridge, prawns, or octopus. Another known recipe is pote asturiano (made with white beans, kale, potatoes, and a variety of sausages and bacon) and potaje de vigilia.
Pork-based foods such as chosco, callos a l'asturiana, and bollu preñáu (chorizo-stuffed bread rolls) are popular. Common meat dishes include carne gobernada (roasted veal), cachopo (a crunchy, crumb-coated veal steak stuffed with ham and cheese), and caldereta. Fish and seafood play an important role in Asturian cuisine. The Cantabrian Sea provides a rich variety of species, including tuna, hake and sardines.
Asturian cheeses are very popular in the rest of Spain. Among them, the most representative is Cabrales cheese, a pungent, blue cheese developed in the regions near the Picos de Europa. Other popular cheese types are gamonéu afuega'l pitu, and queso de Pría. These are usually eaten with the local cider, a low-alcohol drink made of Asturian apples with a distinctive sourness.
Asturian cider, Sidra de Asturias, made of a special type of apple, is traditionally poured escanciada from a certain height, usually over the head of the waiter/server. When the cider falls into the glass from above, the drink "breaks", becoming aerated and bubbly. It is consumed immediately after being served, in consecutive, tiny shots.
Notable desserts are frisuelos (similar to crêpes, usually filled with cream or apple jam), rice pudding (white rice cooked with milk, lemon zest and sugar), and carbayón (dulce) (puff pastry cakes filled with almond mash and covered with sugar glaze).

Balearic Islands
Balearic cuisine has purely Mediterranean characteristics due to its location. The islands have been conquered several times throughout their history by the French and the English, which left some culinary influences. Some well-known food items are the sobrassada, arroz brut, mahón cheese, gin de Menorca (pelota), and mayonnaise. Among the dishes are tumbet, frito mallorquín, and roasted suckling pig. Popular desserts include ensaïmada, tambor d'ametlla, and suspiros de Manacor.

Basque Country
The cuisine of the Basque Country has a wide and varied range of ingredients and preparations. Food and drinks are especially important in the Basque culture. Highlights include meat and fish dishes. Among fish, cod (bacalao) is produced in various preparations, such as bacalao al pil pil and bacalao a la vizcaína. Also popular are anchovies, bream, and bonito. Among the most famous dishes is changurro (stuffed king crab). Common meat dishes include beef steaks, pork loin with milk, fig leaf quail, and marinated goose.
Txakoli or chacolí (a white wine characterised by its high acidity and a lesser-than-average alcohol content) is a staple drink from the Basque Country, produced in Álava, Guipúzcoa and Biscay. Basque cider is popular following the apple harvest and is served in cider houses and bars.

Canary Islands
The Canary Islands have a unique cuisine due to their geographical location in the Atlantic Ocean. The Canary Islands were part of the trading routes to the Americas, hence creating a melting pot of different culinary traditions. Fish (fresh or salted) and potatoes are among the most common staple foods in the islands. The consumption of cheese, fruits, and pork also characterizes Canarian cuisine. The islands' close proximity to continental Africa influences the climate and creates a range of warm temperatures that in modern times have fostered the agriculture of tropical and semitropical crops: bananas, yams, mangoes, avocados, and persimmons. These crops are heavily used in Canarian cuisine.
The aboriginal people, Guanches, based their diet on gofio (a type of flour made of different toasted grains), shellfish, and goat and pork products. Gofio is still consumed in the islands and has become part of the traditional cuisine.
A sauce called mojo is very common throughout the islands. It has been adapted and developed in many ways, so that it may complement various main dishes. Fish dishes usually require a "green mojo" made from coriander or parsley, while roasted meats require a red variety made from chilli peppers that are commonly known as mojo picón.
Some classic dishes in the Canary Islands include papas arrugadas, almogrote, frangollo, rabbit in salmorejo sauce, and stewed goat.
Some popular desserts are truchas (pastries filled with sweet potato or pumpkin), roasted gofio (a gofio-based dough with nuts and honey), príncipe Alberto (a mousse-like preparation with almonds, coffee, and chocolate), and quesillo (a variety of flan made with condensed milk).
Wineries are common in the islands. However, only Malvasia wine from Lanzarote has gained international recognition.

Cantabria
A popular Cantabrian dish is cocido montañés (highlander stew): a rich stew made with beans, cabbage, and pork. Seafood is widely used and bonito is present in the typical sorropotún or marmita de bonitu (tuna pot). Recognized quality meats include Tudanca veal and game meat.
Cantabrian pastries include sobaos and quesadas pasiegas. Dairy products include Cantabrian cream cheese, smoked cheeses, picón Bejes-Tresviso, and quesucos de Liébana.
As for alcohol, orujo is the Cantabrian pomace brandy. Cider (sidra) and chacoli wine are also favorites. Cantabria has two wines labelled denominación de origen calificada ('denomination of qualified origin'): Costa de Cantabria and Liébana.

Castile-La Mancha
In Castilla-La Mancha, the culinary habits reflect the origin of foods eaten by shepherds and peasants. Wheat and grains are a dominant product and ingredient—they are used in bread, soups, gazpacho manchego, migas, and porridge. One of the most abundant ingredients in Manchego cuisine is garlic, leading to dishes such as ajoarriero, ajo puerco, and ajo mataero.
Some traditional recipes are gazpacho manchego, pisto manchego, and migas ruleras. Also popular in this region is morteruelo, a kind of foie gras. Manchego cheese is also renowned.
Because its lands are dry, and thus unable to sustain large amounts of cattle living on grass, an abundance of small animals, such as rabbit and especially birds (pheasant, quail, partridge, squab), can be found. This has led to game meat being incorporated into traditional dishes, such as conejo al Ajillo (rabbit in garlic sauce), perdiz escabechada (marinated partridge) or huevos de codorniz (quail eggs).

Castile and León
In Castile and León, characteristic dishes include morcilla (a black pudding made with special spices), judión de la Granja, sopa de ajo (garlic soup), cochinillo asado (roast piglet), lechazo (roast lamb), and chuletón de Ávila (Ávila rib steak). Other foods include botillo del Bierzo, hornazo from Salamanca, jamón de Guijuelo (a cured ham from Guijuelo, Salamanca), salchicha de Zaratán, other sausages, Serrada cheese (made from sheep's milk), queso de Burgos, and Ribera del Duero wines.
Major wines in Castilian–Leonese cuisine include the robust wine of Toro, reds from Ribera del Duero, whites from Rueda, and clarets from Cigales.

Catalonia
The extensive cuisine of Catalonia has rural origins and features foods from three climates: coastal, mountains, and the interiors. Some famous dishes include escudella, pa amb tomàquet, coca de recapte, samfaina, thyme soup, caragols a la llauna, and the bomba de Barceloneta. Notable sauces are romesco sauce, aioli, bouillabaisse of Catalan origin, and picada.
Cured pork cuisine includes botifarra (white and black) and the fuet of Vic. Fish dishes include suquet (fish stew), cod stew, and arròs negre. Among the vegetable dishes, the most famous are calçots and escalivada (roasted vegetables). Desserts include Catalan cream, carquinyolis, panellets, tortell, and neules.

Extremadura
The cuisine of Extremadura is simple at heart, with dishes based on those prepared by shepherds. It is very similar to the cuisine of Castilla. Extremaduran cuisine is abundant in pork; it is said that the region is one of the best for breeding pigs in Spain thanks to the acorns that grow in their fields. Iberian pig herds raised in the fields of Montánchez are characterized by dark skin and thin legs. This breed of pig is found exclusively in Southwestern Iberia, both in Spain and Portugal. Iberian pork products such as sausages are common and often added to stews (cocido extremeño), as well as cachuela (pork liver pâté seasoned with paprika, garlic and other spices).
Other meat dishes include lamb stew or goat stew (caldereta de cordero and caldereta de cabrito). Additionally, meat dishes can include game meats, such as wild boar, partridge, pheasant, or venison.

Distinctive cheeses from the region include the so-called quesos de torta (sheep milk cheeses typically curdled with the infusion of thistle). Both the torta of La Serena and the torta of El Casar enjoy a protected designation of origin. Among the desserts are leche frita, perrunilla, and pestiños (fritters), as well as many sweets that have their origins in convents.
Cod preparations are well-known, and tench is among the most traditional freshwater fish, with fish and vegetable dishes such as moje de peces or escarapuche.
Soups are often bread-based and are served in both hot and cold forms. Pennyroyal mint is sometimes used to season gazpachos or soups such as sopa de poleo. Extremaduran ajoblanco (ajoblanco extremeño) is a cold soup, which is different from Andalusian ajoblanco since it contains egg yolk in the emulsion and vegetables but no almonds.
The northeastern comarca of La Vera produces pimentón de la Vera, a smoked paprika highly valued all over Spain and extensively used in Extremaduran cuisine.
The region is also known for its vino de pitarra tradition (homemade wine made in small earthenware vessels).

Galicia
Galician cuisine is well known throughout Spain because of emigration to other regions. Similar to neighbouring Asturias, Galicia shares some culinary traditions in stews and soups with the Celtic nations of Atlantic Europe. One of the most noted Galician dishes is soup. Also notable in this region is pork with turnip tops, a popular component of the Galician carnival meal laconadas. Another recipe is caldo de castañas (a chestnut broth), which is commonly consumed during winter. Pork products are also popular. Cattle raising is very common in Galicia, consequently red meat is consumed often, typically with potatoes.
The simplicity and authenticity of Galician cooking methods were praised in the early 20th century by the prominent gastronome Manuel Puga e Parga (also known as Picadillo), who praised dishes such as lacón con grelos or caldeiradas (fish stew), in opposition to the perceived sophistication of the French cuisine.
Galician seafood dishes are well-known and rich in variety. Among these are empanadas, octopus, scallops, crab, and barnacles. In the city of Santiago de Compostela, located along an ancient pilgrim trail from the Pyrenees, it was customary for travelers to eat scallops upon first arriving in the city.
Among the many dairy products is queso de tetilla.
The queimadas (a folkloric preparation of orujo) consists of mixing alcoholic beverages with peels of orange or lemon, sugar or coffee beans, prepared in a nearly ritual ceremony involving the flambé of the beverage. Sweets that are famous throughout the Iberian Peninsula are the tarta de Santiago and filloas (crêpes).

La Rioja
La Rioja is recognized for its use of meats such as pork and cold cuts, which are produced after the traditional slaughter. Lamb is perhaps the second most popular meat product in this region (chuletillas al sarmiento). Veal is common in mountainous areas. The most famous dishes are Rioja style potatoes and fritada. Another well-known dish is caparrones (Rioja stew). Lesser-known dishes are almuerzo del Santo and ajo huevo (garlic eggs). Pimientos asados (roasted peppers) is a notable vegetable dish.
La Rioja is famously known in Spain for its red wine, so most of these dishes are served with wine. Rioja wine has designated origin status.

Madrid
Madrid did not have a special regional identity before 1561, when king Philip II made it the capital of Spain. Since then, due to immigration, many of Madrid's culinary dishes have been made from modifications to dishes from other Spanish regions. Madrid, due to the influx of visitors from the nineteenth century onwards, was one of the first cities to introduce the concept of the restaurant, hosting some of the earliest examples.

Murcia
The cuisine of the region of Murcia can be said to have two versions, one linked to the huerta (irrigated areas) and another one closer to Manchego cuisine. The region of Murcia is famous for its varied fruit production. Among the most outstanding dishes are tortilla murciana, zarangollo, mojete, aubergine a la crème, and pipirrana. A typical sauce of this area is ajo cabañil, used to accompany meat dishes.
Regional dishes include michirones (beans cooked with bay leaves, hot peppers and garlic), olla gitana, cocido murciano con pelotas, and sopa de mondongo.
Some meat products from Murcia are morcilla (black pudding), which is flavored with oregano, and pastel murciano, made with ground beef. Among fish and seafood preparations are the dorada a la sal, prawns from the Mar Menor, and baked octopus. Rice dishes are common and include caldero, arroz empedrado, paella Valenciana (rice with rabbit and snails), arroz de escribano, and arroz viudo.
Confectionery products include exploradores and pastel de Cierva, typical in Murcia gastronomy and found in almost every pastry shop in Murcia. They are both sweet and savoury at the same time. Paparajotes is another dessert, made from lemon leaves.
This region also has wine appellations of origin, such as the wines from Jumilla, Bullas and Yecla.

Navarra
The gastronomy of Navarra has many similarities with Basque cuisine. Some of its best-known dishes are trucha a la navarra (Navarra-style trout), ajoarriero, cordero en chilindrón, and relleno. There are also recipes such as Carlists eggs (omelet).
Salted products are common and include chorizo de Pamplona, bacalao al ajoarriero, stuffing and sausage. The lamb and beef have, at present, designations of origin. Some dairy products are Roncal cheese, curd, and Idiazabal cheese. Typical alcoholic drinks include claret and pacharán.

Valencia
The cuisine of Valencia has two aspects: rural and coastal. A popular and famous Valencia creation is paella, a rice dish cooked in a circular pan and topped with vegetables and meats (originally rabbit and chicken). Dishes such as arroz con costra, arròs negre, fideuá, arròz al horn (arròs al forn in the Valencian language), and rice with beans and turnips are also common in the city.
Coastal towns supply the region with fish, leading to popular dishes like all i pebre (fish stew), typical of the Albufera.
The desserts in this region include coffee liqueur, chocolate Alicante, arnadí, and horchata, the last two being of Muslim origin. Notably, during Christmas, nougat is made in Alicante and Jijona. Another well-known dessert is peladillas (almonds wrapped in a thick layer of caramel).

Notable Spanish chefs
Ferran Adrià
Juan Mari Arzak
Santi Santamaría
Martín Berasategui
Carme Ruscalleda
José Andrés – (restaurants: Minibar by José Andrés, Washington D.C.) – Andrés hosts Made in Spain on PBS.
Karlos Arguiñano – celebrity television chef
Sergi Arola – (restaurants: La Broché, Arola, and Sergi Arola Gastro)
Penelope Casas – New York-born cookbook author
Carlos Dominguez Cidon – recipient of the "Premio Alimentos" award in 1999 and Michelin Guiding Star award in 2004; author of eight books
María Mestayer de Echagüe – also known as "Marquesa de Parabere", the author of a two-volume cooking encyclopaedia entitled La Cocina Completa
Ángel Muro – a 19th-century food expert and author of the book Practicón
Simone and Ines Ortega – authors of 1080 recetas (1080 Recipes)
Manuel María Puga y Parga – an early-20th century food expert and author of La cocina práctica
Joan Roca, Jordi Roca i Fontané, and Josep Roca i Fontané – (restaurants: "El Celler de Can Roca", "Rocambolesc", "Can Roca", "Mas Marroch", and "Cap Roig" in the province of Girona; "Roca Barcelona" in the province of Barcelona) – Three Michelin stars in 2009. In 2013, El Celler de Can Roca was selected as the best restaurant in the world by Restaurant magazine.

See also
Early impact of Mesoamerican goods in Iberian society
List of Spanish desserts
List of Spanish dishes
List of Spanish soups and stews
Agriculture in Spain
List of Spanish cheeses
Bread culture in Spain
List of cuisines
Mediterranean cuisine
European cuisine
Filipino cuisine
Romani cuisine

References
External links
 Spanish cuisine at the Wikibooks Cookbook subproject
 Media related to Cuisine of Spain at Wikimedia Commons
 Spanish cuisine travel guide from Wikivoyage

## List of museums in Spain
This is a list of museums in Spain. According to the Ministry of Culture, there are about 1,500 museums in Spain.

Andalusia
Province of Almería
Province of Cádiz
Casa Pinillos
Casa de la Contaduría
Casa del Terror y lo Fantástico Cádiz Oculto
Museum of Cadiz
Museo Arqueológico Municipal de Jerez de la Frontera
Museo Arqueológico Municipal de El Puerto de Santa María
Museo Fundación Rafael Alberti
Museo Histórico Municipal de San Fernando
Museo de Las Cortes de Cadiz
Museo Naval de San Fernando
Museo del Titere
Museo Taller Litográfico
Fundación NMAC-Montenmedio Arte Contemporáneo de Vejer de la Frontera
Yacimiento Arqueológico Gadir

Province of Córdoba
Al Iksir - Museo de la Alquimia
Archaeological Museum of Córdoba
Bullfighting Museum of Cordoba
Casa del Agua
Casa de Sefarad
Casa-Museo del Guadamecí Omeya
Centro de Flamenco Fosforito
Centro de Creación Contemporánea
Centro De Arte Contemporaneo Rafael Boti
La Casa Andalusí
Museum of Fine Arts of Córdoba
Museo Julio Romero de Torres de Córdoba
Museo Torre de la Calahorra de Córdoba
Palacio de los Paez de Castillejos

Province of Granada
Archaeological Museum of Granada
Museo de Bellas Artes de Granada
Museo Cuevas del Sacromonte
Carmen de Los Geranios - Casa Museo De Max Moreau
Casa Museo Federico García Lorca de Granada
Casa Museo de Manuel de Falla de Granada
Casa de Zafra
Centro Cultural Gran Capitan
Centro José Guerrero
Judería de Granada
Museo Parque de las Ciencias de Granada
Museo de la Alhambra
Museo de Casa de los Tiros
Museo Etnológico de la Mujer Gitana
Museo San Juan de Dios
Museo Sefardí
Museo de La Zambra - Cueva de Curro
Palacio de los Olvidados

Province of Huelva
Martin Alonso Pinzon House Museum
Museo de Huelva
Centro de Arte Moderno y Contemporáneo Daniel Vázquez Díaz de Nerva
Centro de la Comunicación Jesús Hermida

Province of Jaén
Museo de Jaén
Museo de Artes y Costumbres del alto Guadalquivir
Archaeological Museum of Úbeda
Archaeological Museum of Linares

Province of Málaga
Classroom of the Sea Museum Alborania (Aula del Mar.)
Colección del Museo Ruso
Flamenco Museum / Peña Juan Breva
Museo Automovilístico de Málaga
Museo de la imaginación
Museo de Málaga
Museo Picasso Málaga
Museo Revello de Toro
Museo del Vidrio y Cristal de Málaga
Museo del Vino-Málaga
Carmen Thyssen Museum
CAC Málaga
Museum Jorge Rando
Centre Georges Pompidou Málaga
Museo del Grabado Español Contemporáneo de Marbella
Fundación Picasso
Principia Science Center
Interactive Music Museum
Museo del Patrimonio Municipal

Province of Seville
Antiquarium
Casa de la Ciencia
Casa de Murillo
Centro Andaluz de Arte Contemporáneo
Centro Cerámica Triana
House Fabiola-Mariano Bellver Donation
Military Historical Museum of Seville
Monastery of Santa Maria de las Cuevas
Museum of Fine Arts of Seville (Museo Bellas Artes de Sevilla)
Museo de Artes y Costumbres Populares de Sevilla
Museo del Baile Flamenco
Archeological Museum of Seville
Municipal History Museum of Écija (Museo Histórico Municipal de Écija)
Museum of Popular Arts and Traditions
Naval Museum Torre Del Oro
Palacio de la Condesa de Lebrija
Palacio de las Dueñas
Palacio Marqueses de la Algaba
Real Academia de Bellas Artes de Santa Isabel de Hungría
Fundación FOCUS y Centro Velázquez. Seville.

Aragon
Aljafería (Zaragoza)
Alma Mater Museum
Casa Palacio de los Condes de Bureta
Centro de Historias
Charterhouse of Aula Dei (Zaragoza)
Drawing Museum Castle Larrés July Gavín
Dinopolis
Escuela Museo de Origami Zaragoza
Huesca Museum
IAACC Pablo Serrano
La Seo de Zaragoza
La Era De Vicen
Mausoleum of the Amantes
Museo Aquagraria
Museo Angel Oresanz y Artes de Serrablo
Museo de Calatayud
Museo Diocesano de Jaca
Museo de los Faroles y Rosario de Cristal
Museo del Foro de Caesaraugusta
Museo del Fuego y de los Bomberos
Museo Gonzalvo
Museo Goya - Colección Ibercaja - Museo Camón Aznar (Zaragoza)
Museo del Grabado de Goya
Museo De Juegos Tradicionales
Museo Juan Cabré
Museo de Historia y Tradición de Graus
Museum of Military Miniatures
Museo de las Momias de Quinto
Museo Diocesano Barbastro-Monzón
Museo de la Mina de Mequinenza
Museo Minero Andorra "MWINAS"
Museo Minero de Escucha
Museo naturalista 'La Casa de los Buitres'
Museo Pablo Gargallo
Museo Pedagógico de Aragón
Museo del Puerto Fluvial de Caesaraugusta
El Museo Salvador Victoria
Museo Paleontológico de Galve
Museo de las Termas Públicas de Caesaraugusta
Museo del Teatro de Caesaraugusta
Provincial Museum of Teruel
San Pablo (Zaragoza)
Tapestry Museum
Híjar Synagogue
Zaragoza Museum

Principality of Asturias
Alfercam Museum
Archaeological Museum of Asturias
Asturias Gold Museum
Black Pottery Museum
Bowling Museum of Asturias
Casa de la Apicultura
Castillo de Salas (castle)
Centro Niemeyer
Cider Museum
Ethnographic Museum of Dairy
Ethnographic Museum of Grandas de Salime
Ethnographic Museums Network of Asturias
Museum of Fine Arts of Asturias
Gijón Railway Museum
International Bagpipe Museum
Juan Barjola Museum of Painting
Jurassic Museum of Asturias
LABoral Centro de Arte y Creación Industrial
Mazonovo
Mining Museum of Asturias
Museum of Avilés Urban History
Museum of the Asturian People
Philippe Cousteau Anchor Museum
Pinacoteca Eduardo Úrculo
Sacred Art Museum of Tineo
Museum of the Siderurgy
Universidad Laboral de Gijón

Balearic Islands
Casa Museu Dionís Bennàssar
Casa Museo Els Calderers
Es Baluard
Gran Hotel (Palma)
Frédéric Chopin and George Sand Museum
Fundació Pilar i Joan Miró in Mallorca
Museu Arqueològic de Son Fornés
Museu Balear de Ciències Naturals
Museu d’Història de Manacor
Museo Histórico Militar de San Carlos
Museu La Granja d'Esporles
Museum of Mallorca
Museo de Menorca
Puig des Molins
Royal Palace of La Almudaina

Basque Country
Arkeologi Museoa Bilbao
Arms Industry Museum of Eibar
Arrantzaleen Museoa
Artziniega’s Ethnographic Museum
Artium Museum
Ataria
Basque Railway Museum
Basque Museum of the History of Medicine and Science
Bilbao Fine Arts Museum
Centro de Interpretación Santurtzi Itsasoa
Chillida-Leku
La Encartada Fabrika-Museoa
Eureka! Zientzia Museoa
Euskal Herria Museoa
Euskal Itsas Museoa - Museo Marítimo Vasco
Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
Itsasmuseum Bilbao
Kurutzesantu Museum
Maritime Museum Ria de Bilbao
Museo de Bellas Artes de Álava
Museum Cemento Rezola
Museo de Ciencias Naturales de Álava
Museo Cristóbal Balenciaga
Museo Diocesano de Arte Sacro de Álava
Museo Ferrería El Pobal
Museum of Fournier de Naipes
Museo de la Paz de Guernica
Museo de Los Faroles
Museo de la Minería del País Vasco
Museo de Fotografía y Cine
Museo Pasos de Semana Santa
Musée Basque
Museo Zumalakarregi
Reproductions Museum Bilbao
Rialia Museum
San Telmo Museum
Sagardoetxea - Museo de la Sidra Vasca
TOPIC - Museo y Centro Internacional de la Marioneta de Tolosa
Torre Loizaga

Canary Islands
Lanzarote
Casa Museo del Timple
Casa Museo Palacio Spínola
Castillo de San Gabriel: Museo de Historia de Arrecife
Castillo de San José: International Museum of Art
Museo de Aloe de Lanzarote
Museo Arqueológico de Lanzarote
Museo Atlántico Lanzarote
Museo Aeronáutico del Aeropuerto de Lanzarote
Museo Etnografico Tanit
Museo el Grifo
Museo Internacional de Arte Contemporáneo, MIAC
Museo Lagomar

Tenerife
Archaeological Museum of Puerto de la Cruz
ARTlandya - la Finca, el Mundo Muñecas
Casa de los Balcones
Casa del Carnaval
Casa del Vino
Castle of San Cristóbal (Santa Cruz de Tenerife)
Centro Alfarero y Museo Etnográfico Cha Domitila
Centro de Fotografía Isla de Tenerife
Fundación Cristino de Vera-Espacio Cultural CajaCanarias
Historical Military Museum of the Canary Islands
Latin American Craft Museum of Tenerife
Museo de Antropología de Tenerife
Museo de Arte Sacro El Tesoro De La Concepción
Museo Casa de El Capitán
Museum of Contemporary Art Eduardo Westerdahl (Macew)
Museo de la Naturaleza y Arqueología
Museo Municipal de Bellas Artes de Santa Cruz de Tenerife
Museo del Pescador
Museum of Science and the Cosmos
Museum of the History of Tenerife
Sede Casa de Carta
Tenerife Espacio de las Artes

Gran Canaria
Arucas Municipal Museum
Atlantic Center of Modern Art
Casa de Colón
Casa-Museo Antonio Padrón
Casa-Museo León y Castillo
Casa-Museo Pérez Galdós
Casa-Museo Tomás Morales
Centro de Arte La Regenta
Cueva Pintada Museum and Archaeological Park
Elder Museum of Science and Technology
Museo Canario
Museo Castillo de Mata
Museo Diocesano de Arte Sacro de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Museo Etnográfico Casas Cuevas de Artenara
Museo Naval
Museo Néstor
Museo La Zafra
Painted Cave, Galdar
Perez Galdos House Museum

La Palma
Archaeological Museum Benahoarita
Casa de La Cultura de Santo Domingo
Museo Arqueológico Benahoarita
Museo la Casa Roja
Museo de Interpretación del Gofio
Museo Naval - Barco de la Virgen
Museo del Puro Palmero
Museo de la Seda Las Hilanderas
Naval Museum

La Gomera
Casa Bencomo Biblioteca Insular
Casa de Colón
Centro de Interpretación - Las Loceras
Casa de la Miel de Palma
Museo La Alameda
Museo Arqueológico de La Gomera
Museo Etnográfico de La Gomera

Cantabria
Cades Ferreria
Casa de las Doñas
Centro Botín
Centro de Interpretación de la ciudad de Santander
Centro de Interpretación del Hombre Pez
Ecomuseum Fluviarium of Liérganes
El Capricho
Finca del Marques de Valdecilla
Monastery of Santo Toribio de Liébana
Muralla de Santander
Museum of Prehistory and Archaeology of Cantabria
Museum of the Royal Artillery Factory
Museum of Torture - Inquisicion
Museo de Las Amas de Cría Pasiegas
Museo del Barquillero
Museo de la Campana
Museo de la Cantería "Rodrigo Gil de Hontañón"
Muelle de las Carabelas
Museo Etnográfico de Cantabria
Museo Etnográfico de Joaquín Sáinz de Rozas
Museo De Las Tres Villas Pasiegas
Museo Marítimo del Cantábrico
Museo De La Naturaleza De Cantabria
Museo De La Vijanera
National Museum and Research Center of Altamira
Observatorio del Arte
Regina Coeli Diocesan Museum
Santa Olaja mill

Castile-La Mancha
Albacete Police Museum
Albacete Provincial Museum
Antonio Pérez Foundation Museum
Army Museum
Artesanía Burgueño
Archivo-Museo Sánchez Mejías
Casa Bellomonte
Ceramics Museum Ruiz de Luna
Cueva de Medrano
El Greco Museum, Toledo
El Pozo los Lagartos
Espacio Torner
Museo de la Acuarela Rafael Requena
Museo Antonio López
Museo de Arte Abstracto Español
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo Infanta Elena
Museo-Casa de Dulcinea del Toboso
Museo del Carro y Aperos de Labranza
Museo Cervantino
Museo de Ciudad Real
Museo Comarcal de Daimiel
Museo del Ejército
Museo Elisa Cendrero
Museo de Guadalajara
Museo del Hidalgo
Museo de Humor Grafico de Dulcinea
Museo de los Concilios y la Cultura Visigoda
Museo Manuel Piña
Museo de Miniaturas Profesor Max
Museo Municipal de la Cuchillería de Albacete
Museo de la Música Pintada - CROMATICA
Museo Paleontológico de Cuenca
Museo Palmero
Museo Parroquial de Tapices de Pastrana
Museo del Queso Manchego Toledo
Museo Santísima Trinidad
Museo de la Semana Santa de Cuenca
Museum of Words
Museum of Santa Cruz
National Theater Museum
Palace of the Infantado
Pintura Mural de Alarcón
Santa María la Blanca
Science Museum of Castilla La Mancha
Sephardic Museum
Spanish Abstract Art Museum
Synagogue of El Transito
Treasure Museum Guarrazar - Guadamur
Provincial Museum of Ciudad Real
Museum of Guadalajara

Castile and León
CARMUS - Museo Carmelitano Teresa de Jesús
Casa de Cervantes
Casa Lis
Casa Museo de la Ribera
Casa-Museo Satur Juanela
Casa de Cervantes
Casa de las Flores Museo del Juguete de Hojalata
Castle of Burgos
Centro de Interpretación del León Romano
Centro Leonés de Arte
Christopher Columbus Museum
Convento de San José (Ávila)
Episcopal Palace, Astorga
Fundación Vela Zanetti
Museum of African Art Arellano Alonso
Museum of Automotive History
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Castilla y León (León)
Museo de Ávila
Museum of Contemporary Spanish Art - Patio Herreriano (Valladolid)
Museo de la Emigración Leonesa
Museo Etnográfico de Castilla y León
Museo del Ferrocarril
Museo Grand Central
Museo Herminio Revilla
Museum of Human Evolution
Museo de Historia de Arévalo
Museo de la Industria Harinera de Castilla y León
Museo de la Industria Chacinera
Museo Industrial Textil de Béjar
Museum of Jewellery in the Silver Way, in La Bañeza, León
Museo de León
Museo Liceo Egipcio
Museo Numantino
Museo Patio Herreriano
Museo de la Radio
Museo Real Casa de Moneda de Segovia
Museo Sierra Pambley
National Museum of Sculpture, Valladolid
Numantine Museum of Soria
Oriental Museum (Valladolid)
Roman Vila de Almenara
Royal Glass Factory of La Granja
Royal Palace of La Granja de San Ildefonso, in La Granja de San Ildefonso, province of Segovia
Royal Palace of Riofrío, in Riofrío, province of Segovia
San Pedro Cultural Becerril de Campos
Territorio Artlanza
Valladolid Science Museum
VRO La Olmeda
Valladolid Museum
Zamora Museum

Catalonia
Extremadura
Archaeological Museum of Badajoz
Baluarte de San Pedro
Cáceres Museum
Casa del Ajimez
Casa-Museo Árabe Yusuf Al-Burch
Casa Museo Guayasamín de Cáceres
Casa Museo Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Ethnographic Museum "González Santana"
Granite Museum
Motorcycle Museum and Classic Car
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo Helga de Alvear
MUBA, Museo de Bellas Artes de Badajoz
Museo del Automóvil
Museo de la Cárcel Real
Museo del Carnaval de Badajoz
Museo Catedralicio Badajoz
Museo de la Cereza
Museo de las Ciencias del Vino
Museo de la Ciudad de Badajoz "Luis de Morales
Museo Etnográfico Textil Pérez Enciso de Plasencia
Museo Extremeño e Iberoamericano de Arte Contemporáneo (Badajoz)
Museo Fundación Pecharromán
Museo Geológico y Minero de Santa Marta
Museo de la Historia de la Medicina y la Salud de Extremadura
Museo del Jamón de Monesterio
Museo Papercraft Olivenza
Museo Perez Comendador-Leroux
Museo Taurino de Badajoz
Museo Vostell Malpartida
National Museum of Roman Art
Palace los Golfines de Abajo
Paprika Museum Jaraiz de la Vera
Pizarro House Museum
Santa Clara Museum

Galicia
Archiepiscopal Towers Interpretation Centre
Barco-Museo Virgen del Carmen
Casa de las Artes
Casa das Ciencias
Casa Histórica de Cambados
Casa do Patrón Museo Etnográfico
Cathedral Museum
Centro Arqueológico de la Villa Romana de Toralla
Centro Torrente Ballester CTB
Club Naval de Ferrol
College of Nosa Señora da Antiga
Contemporary Art Center of Galicia
Domus
Domus Mitreo
Fundación Barrié
Fundación Curros Enríquez
Fundación Eugenio Granell / Pazo del Marques de Bendaña
Illa das Esculturas
Museum of Contemporary Art, Vigo
Museu Nacional de Ciencia e Tecnología
Museo de Bellas Artes de Coruña
Museo Carlos Maside
Museo Casa de la Troya
Museo Estrella Galicia
Museo Etnográfico da Limia
Museo Etnográfico Monte Caxado
Museo de Historia Natural da SGHN
Museo Interactivo da Historia de Lugo
Museo Man de Camelle
Museo do Mar de Galicia
Museo Municipal Manuel Torres
Museo Naval Ferrol
Museo de Prehistoria e Arqueoloxía de Vilalba
Museum of Pilgrimage
Museo Provincial de Lugo
Museo Provincial de Pontevedra - Edificio Castelao
Museo del Pueblo Gallego
Museo Quiñones de León
Océano Surf Museo
Palloza Museo Casa do Sesto
Pazo de San Isidro
Pazo de Tor
Pontevedra Museum
Pinacoteca Francisco Fernández del Riego
Saint Anton Castle
Sala de Exposicións Porta Miñá
Salinae - Centro Arqueolóxico do Areal
Spain's National Exhibition of Ship Building

La Rioja
Casa de las Ciencias
Casa de la Imagen
Centro de Interpretación Contrebia Leucade
Cueva de los Cien Pilares
Espacio Lagares
History and Archeology Museum Najerillense
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Haro El Torreón
Museo de La Rioja
Museo de la Romanización
Museo Würth La Rioja
Museo de la Verdura
Paleontological Interpretation Center of La Rioja
Sala Amós Salvador
Winery - Vivanco Museum of Wine Culture

Community of Madrid
Alcalá de Henares
Regional Archaeological Museum of the Community of Madrid
Madrid

Region of Murcia
Archaeological Museum of Lorca
Archaeological Museum of Murcia
Arrabal de la Arrixaca
Asociación Murciana de Amigos del Ferrocarril (AMAF)
Centro de Visitantes Muralla de Murcia
Centro de Visitantes de Monteagudo
Conjunto Monumental San Juan de Dios
La Casa del Belén
National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology (Cartagena)
Museo Archicofradía De La Sangre
Museum of the Cathedral of Murcia
Museum of the City
Museo de Bellas Artes de Murcia
Museo de la Ciencia y el Agua
Museo Hidráulico "Los Molinos del Río Segura"
MUDEM (Museo del Enclave Muralla)
Museo Ramón Gaya
Museo Salzillo
Museo de Santa Clara
Real Casino de Murcia

Foral Community of Navarre
Amaiur Arkeologia Zentroa
Casa Museo - Julián Gayarre - Museoetxea
Jorge Oteiza Museum Foundation
Las Eretas
La Fábrica Vieja - Museo de la Conserva
Molino de Zubieta - Zubietako Errota
Museo Arqueológico de ANDELOS
Museo del Carlismo
Museo Casa Jenaro
Museo Diocesano
Museo de Estelas - Hilarriak
Museo Etnografico del Reino de Pamplona
Museo Etnológico de Navarra
Museo -Gustavo de Maeztu- Museoa
Museo Muñoz Sola de Arte Moderno
Museo del Vino de Navarra
Museum of Navarre, Pamplona
Occidens Museum
Parque-Museo Santxotena
Tudela Museum
Ultreia - Centro de Interpretación del Camino de Santiago
University Museum of Navarra
Witch Museum

Valencian Community
Alicante Museum of Contemporary Art
Archaeological Museum of Alicante
Archaeological Museum Camil Visedo
Archaeological Museum of Gandia
Associació Tren Alcoi Gandia
Bombas Gens
Casa del Arte Mayor de la Seda
Casa de la Cultura de Bellreguard
Casa Museo Benlliure
Centre Cultural Sala Parpallò
Diocesan Cathedral Museum of Valencia
Firefighters Museum of Alcoy
Gravina Museum of Fine Arts
González Martí National Museum of Ceramics and Decorative Arts
Gremio Artesano de Artistas Falleros de Valencia
Institut Valencià d'Art Modern
La Almoina Archaeological Museum
The Lladró Museum
Museum of Fine Arts of Valencia
Museo Alcoyano de la Fiesta (MAF)
Museo Antonio Marco Belén Y Casitas De Muñecas
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Villafamés
Museo de Belenes
Museo y Colegio del Arte Mayor de la Seda
Museo Valenciano de la Ilustración y la Modernidad
Museo de Bellas Artes de Castellón
Museu de Belles Arts de València
Museo del Calzado
Museo Casa de las Rocas
Museo Casa Estudio Enrique Lledó
Museu de les Ciències Príncipe Felipe
Museu Escolar de Puçol
Museo Fallero de Gandía
Museu Faller de València
Museu de la Impremta i de les Arts Gràfiques
Museo Histórico Militar
Museo del Mar de Santa Pola
Museo Nacional de Cerámica y Artes Suntuarias González Martí
Museo Nino Bravo
Museo del Pan
Museo de Soldaditos de Plomo L’Iber
Museo Taurino
Museo del Turrón
Museo The Ocean Race
Natural Science Museum of Valencia
Orange Museum
Palau del Marqués de Campo
Prehistory Museum of Valencia
Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Carlos de Valencia
Segrelles Museum
Valencia History Museum
Valencian Museum of Ethnology

See also
List of libraries in Spain
List of archives in Spain

References
External links
Directory of Museums and Collections of Spain
2012 Statistics of Museums and Collections
Museums of Andalusia (more)
Best museums and art galleries in Spain

## Madrid Şehri - Detaylı Mekan Rehberi

### Meşhur Kafeler:
- ☕ **Condemar** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Condemar+Madrid)
- ☕ **Granier** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Granier+Madrid)
- ☕ **El encuentro** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=El+encuentro+Madrid)
- ☕ **Chocolatería San Ginés** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Chocolatería+San+Ginés+Madrid)
- ☕ **Vianvi** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Vianvi+Madrid)

### Popüler Restoranlar:
- 🍽️ **Café Comercial** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Café+Comercial+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **Honest Greens** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Honest+Greens+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **La Parrilla de Nino** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=La+Parrilla+de+Nino+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **Taj Mahal** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Taj+Mahal+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **La Pomarada** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=La+Pomarada+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **Sexto** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Sexto+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **Brasa y Leña** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Brasa+y+Leña+Madrid)
- 🍽️ **Picado Fino** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Picado+Fino+Madrid)

### Tarihi / Meşhur Yerler:
- 🏰 **Monumento a José Calvo Sotelo** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Monumento+a+José+Calvo+Sotelo+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Homenaje a las víctimas españolas que murieron en el campo de concentración nazi de Mauthausen-Gusen** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Homenaje+a+las+víctimas+españolas+que+murieron+en+el+campo+de+concentración+nazi+de+Mauthausen-Gusen+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Monumento a Claudio Moyano** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Monumento+a+Claudio+Moyano+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Nuestra Señora de Valverde** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Nuestra+Señora+de+Valverde+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Sexta Esclusa del Real Canal de Manzanares** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Sexta+Esclusa+del+Real+Canal+de+Manzanares+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Cuarta Esclusa del Real Canal de Manzanares** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Cuarta+Esclusa+del+Real+Canal+de+Manzanares+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Chimenea del antiguo Gasómetro** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Chimenea+del+antiguo+Gasómetro+Madrid)
- 🏰 **Monumento a los Caídos por España** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Monumento+a+los+Caídos+por+España+Madrid)
