--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Armenia
FILE_NAME: country_armenia.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:43:46
----------------

# Armenia

## General Overview
Armenia, officially the Republic of Armenia, is a landlocked country in the Armenian highlands of West Asia. It is a part of the Caucasus region and is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan to the south. Yerevan is the capital, largest city and financial center.
The Armenian highlands have been home to the Hayasa-Azzi, Shupria, and Nairi peoples. By at least 600 BC, an archaic form of Proto-Armenian, an Indo-European language, had diffused into the Armenian highlands. The first Armenian state of Urartu was established in 860 BC, and by the 6th century BC it was replaced by the Satrapy of Armenia. The Kingdom of Armenia reached its height under Tigranes the Great in the 1st century BC and in AD 301 became the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its official religion. Armenia still recognises the Armenian Apostolic Church, the world's oldest national church, as the country's primary religious establishment. The ancient Armenian kingdom was split between the Byzantine and Sasanian Empires around the early 5th century. Under the Bagratuni dynasty, the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia was restored in the 9th century before falling in 1045. Cilician Armenia, an Armenian principality and later a kingdom, was located on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea between the 11th and 14th centuries.
Between the 16th and 19th centuries, the traditional Armenian homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia came under the rule of the Ottoman and Persian empires, repeatedly ruled by either of the two over the centuries. By the 19th century, Eastern Armenia had been conquered by the Russian Empire while most of Western Armenia remained under Ottoman rule. During World War I up to 1.5 million Armenians were systematically exterminated in the Armenian genocide. Following the Russian Revolution, the First Republic of Armenia declared independence in 1918. By 1920, the state was incorporated into the Soviet Union as the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic. The Republic of Armenia became independent in 1991 during the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Modern Armenia is a unitary, multi-party, democratic nation-state. It is a developing country and ranks 69th on the Human Development Index as of 2023. Its economy is primarily based on industrial output and mineral extraction. While Armenia is geographically located in the South Caucasus, it views itself as part of Europe and is generally considered geopolitically European. The country is a member of numerous European organisations including the Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the Eastern Partnership, Eurocontrol, the Assembly of European Regions, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Armenia is a member of certain regional groups throughout Eurasia, including the Asian Development Bank, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union, and the Eurasian Development Bank. Armenia supported the once de facto independent Republic of Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh), which had seceded from Azerbaijan in 1991, until Azerbaijan reincorporated the region through a siege and military offensive in 2023.

Etymology
The original native Armenian name for the country was Հայք (Hayk'); however, it is currently rarely used. The contemporary name Հայաստան (Hayastan) became popular in the Middle Ages by addition of the Persian suffix -stan (place). However the origins of the name Hayastan trace back to much earlier dates and were first attested in c. 5th century in the works of Agathangelos, Faustus of Byzantium, Ghazar Parpetsi, Koryun, and Sebeos.
The name has traditionally been derived from Hayk (Հայկ), the legendary patriarch of the Armenians and a great-great-grandson of Noah, who, according to the 5th-century AD author Movsis Khorenatsi, defeated the Babylonian king Bel in 2492 BC and established his nation in the Ararat region. Further origin of the name is uncertain. It is postulated that the name Hay comes from one of the two confederated, Hittite vassal states – the Ḫayaša-Azzi (1600–1200 BC).
The exonym Armenia is attested in the Old Persian Behistun Inscription (515 BC) as Armina (𐎠𐎼𐎷𐎡𐎴). The Ancient Greek terms Ἀρμενία (Armenía) and Ἀρμένιοι (Arménioi, "Armenians") are first mentioned by Hecataeus of Miletus (c. 550 BC – c. 476 BC). Xenophon, a Greek general serving in some of the Persian expeditions, describes many aspects of Armenian village life and hospitality in around 401 BC.
Some scholars have linked the name Armenia with the Early Bronze Age state of Armani (Armanum, Armi) or the Late Bronze Age state of Arme (Shupria). These connections are inconclusive as it is not known what languages were spoken in these kingdoms. Additionally, while it is agreed that Arme was located to the immediate west of Lake Van (probably in the vicinity of Sason, and therefore in the greater Armenia region), the location of the older site of Armani is a matter of debate. Some modern researchers have placed it near modern Samsat, and have suggested it was populated, at least partially, by an early Indo-European-speaking people. It is possible that the name Armenia originates in Armini, Urartian for "inhabitant of Arme" or "Armean country". The Arme tribe of Urartian texts may have been the Urumu, who in the 12th century BC attempted to invade Assyria from the north with their allies the Mushki and the Kaskians. The Urumu apparently settled in the vicinity of Sason, lending their name to the regions of Arme and the nearby lands of Urme and Inner Urumu.

According to the histories of both Movsis Khorenatsi and Michael Chamchian, Armenia derives from the name of Aram, a lineal descendant of Hayk. In the Hebrew Bible, the Table of Nations lists Aram as the son of Shem, to whom the Book of Jubilees attests, And for Aram there came forth the fourth portion, all the land of Mesopotamia between the Tigris and the Euphrates to the north of the Chaldees to the border of the mountains of Asshur and the land of 'Arara'. Jubilees 8:21 also apportions the Mountains of Ararat to Shem, which Jubilees 9:5 expounds to be apportioned to Aram.
Jewish historian Flavius Josephus states in his Antiquities of the Jews,

Aram had the Aramites, which the Greeks called Syrians;... Of the four sons of Aram, Uz founded Trachonitis and Damascus: this country lies between Palestine and Celesyria. Ul founded Armenia; and Gather the Bactrians; and Mesa the Mesaneans; it is now called Charax Spasini.

History
Prehistoric
The first human traces are supported by the presence of Acheulean tools, generally close to the obsidian outcrops more than 1 million years ago. The most recent and important excavation is at the Nor Geghi 1 Stone Age site in the Hrazdan river valley. Thousands of 325,000 year-old artifacts may indicate that this stage of human technological innovation occurred intermittently throughout the Old World, rather than spreading from a single point of origin (usually hypothesized to be Africa), as was previously thought.

Many early Bronze Age settlements were built in Armenia (Valley of Ararat, Shengavit, Harich, Karaz, Amiranisgora, Margahovit, Garni, etc.). One of the important sites of the Early Bronze Age is Shengavit settlement. It was located on the site of today's capital of Armenia, Yerevan.

Antiquity
Armenia lies in the highlands surrounding the mountains of Ararat. There is evidence of an early civilisation in Armenia in the Bronze Age and earlier, dating to about 4000 BC. Archaeological surveys in 2010 and 2011 at the Areni-1 cave complex have resulted in the discovery of the world's earliest known leather shoe, skirt, and wine-producing facility.
Several Bronze Age cultures and states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia, including the Trialeti-Vanadzor culture, Hayasa-Azzi, and Mitanni (located in southwestern historical Armenia), all of which are believed to have had Indo-European populations. The Nairi confederation and its successor, Urartu, successively established their sovereignty over the Armenian Highlands. Each of the aforementioned nations and confederacies participated in the ethnogenesis of the Armenians. A large cuneiform lapidary inscription found in Yerevan established that the modern capital of Armenia was founded in the summer of 782 BC by King Argishti I. Yerevan is one of the world's oldest continuously inhabited cities.

After the fall of the state of Urartu at the beginning of the 6th century BC, the Armenian highlands were for some time under the hegemony of the Medes, and after that they were part of the Achaemenid Empire. Armenia was part of the Achaemenid state from the second half of the 6th century BC until the second half of the 4th century BC divided into two satrapies: XIII (western part, with the capital in Melitene) and XVIII (northeastern part). During the late 6th century BC, the first geographical entity that was called Armenia by neighbouring populations was established under the Orontid dynasty.

The kingdom became fully sovereign from the sphere of influence of the Seleucid Empire in 190 BC under King Artaxias I and begun the rule of the Artaxiad dynasty. Armenia reached its height between 95 and 66 BC under Tigranes the Great, becoming the most powerful kingdom of its time east of the Roman Republic.
In the next centuries, Armenia was in the Persian Empire's sphere of influence during the reign of Tiridates I, the founder of the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, which was a branch of the Parthian Empire. Throughout its history, the kingdom of Armenia enjoyed both periods of independence and periods of autonomy subject to contemporary empires. Its strategic location between two continents has subjected it to invasions by many peoples, including Assyria (under Ashurbanipal, at around 669–627 BC, the boundaries of Assyria reached as far as Armenia and the Caucasus Mountains), Medes, Achaemenid Empire, Greeks, Parthians, Romans, Sasanian Empire, Byzantine Empire, Arabs, Seljuk Empire, Mongols, Ottoman Empire, the successive Safavid, Afsharid, and Qajar dynasties of Iran, and the Russians.

Religion in ancient Armenia was historically related to a set of beliefs that, in Persia, led to the emergence of Zoroastrianism. It particularly focused on the worship of Mithra and also included a pantheon of gods such as Aramazd, Vahagn, Anahit, and Astghik. The country used the solar Armenian calendar, which consisted of 12 months.
Christianity first appeared in Armenia in the 1st century AD, with the arrival of two of Jesus's twelve apostles – Thaddaeus and Bartholomew. Under the influence of Gregory the Illuminator, King Tiridates III proclaimed Christianity as the state religion in 301, partly in defiance of the Sasanian Empire. Armenia thus became the first officially Christian state. Prior to this, during the latter part of the Parthian era, Armenia was a predominantly Zoroastrian country.
Another major cornerstone of Armenian identity – the Armenian alphabet – was invented a century later by Mesrop Mashtots c. 405. After the fall of the Armenian Arsacids in 428, most of Armenia was incorporated as a marzpanate within Sasanian Persia. Following the Battle of Avarayr in 451, Christian Armenians maintained their religion, and Armenia gained autonomy in the Treaty of Nvarsak in 484.

Middle Ages
The Sassanid Empire was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate in the mid 7th century, reuniting Armenian lands previously taken by the Byzantine Empire, and Armenia subsequently emerged as Arminiya, an autonomous principality under the Umayyad Caliphate. The principality was ruled by the Prince of Armenia, and recognised by the Caliph and the Byzantine Emperor. It was part of the administrative division/emirate Arminiya created by the Arabs, which also included parts of Georgia and Caucasian Albania, and had its centre in the Armenian city Dvin. Arminiya lasted until 884, when it regained its independence from the weakened Abbasid Caliphate under Ashot I of Armenia.
The reemergent Armenian kingdom was ruled by the Bagratuni dynasty and lasted until 1045. In time, several areas of the Bagratid Armenia separated as independent kingdoms and principalities such as the Kingdom of Vaspurakan ruled by the House of Artsruni in the south, Kingdom of Syunik in the east, or Kingdom of Artsakh on the territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh, while still recognising the supremacy of the Bagratid kings.
In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia. Soon, the other Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well. The Byzantine rule was short-lived, as in 1071 the Seljuk Empire defeated the Byzantines and conquered Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert. Ruben I, Prince of Armenia, went with some of his countrymen into the gorges of the Taurus Mountains and then into Tarsus of Cilicia; he was escaping death or servitude at the hands of those who had killed Gagik II, King of Ani, his relative. The Byzantine governor of the palace gave them shelter where the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually established on 6 January 1198 under Leo I, King of Armenia, a descendant of Prince Ruben.
Cilicia was a strong ally of the European Crusaders and saw itself as a bastion of Christendom in the East. Cilicia's significance in Armenian history and statehood is also attested by the transfer of the seat of the Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church, the spiritual leader of the Armenian people, to the region.
In the early 12th century, Armenian princes of the Zakarid family drove out the Seljuk Turks and established a semi-independent principality in northern and eastern Armenia known as Zakarid Armenia, which lasted under the patronage of the Georgian Kingdom. The Orbelian dynasty shared control with the Zakarids in various parts of the country, especially in Syunik and Vayots Dzor, while the House of Hasan-Jalalyan controlled provinces of Artsakh and Utik as the Kingdom of Artsakh.

Early modern era
During the 1230s, the Mongol Empire conquered Zakarid Armenia and then the remainder of Armenia. The Mongolian invasions were soon followed by those of other Central Asian tribes, such as the Kara Koyunlu, Timurid dynasty and Ağ Qoyunlu, which continued from the 13th century until the 15th century. After incessant invasions, each bringing destruction to the country, with time Armenia became weakened.
In the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire and the Safavid dynasty of Iran divided Armenia. From the early 16th century, both Western Armenia and Eastern Armenia fell to the Safavids. Owing to the century long Turco-Iranian geopolitical rivalry that would last in West Asia, significant parts of the region were frequently fought over between the two rivalling empires during the Ottoman–Persian Wars. From the mid 16th century with the Peace of Amasya, and decisively from the first half of the 17th century with the Treaty of Zuhab until the first half of the 19th century, Eastern Armenia was ruled by the successive Safavid, Afsharid and Qajar dynasties, while Western Armenia remained under Ottoman rule. From 1604, Abbas I of Iran implemented a "scorched earth" policy in the region to protect his north-western frontier against any invading Ottoman forces, a policy that involved a forced resettlement of masses of Armenians outside of their homelands.

The 18th century saw the first foray of the Russian Empire into the region, with Peter the Great and his alliance with the Armenian meliks of Syunik and Artsakh during the Russo-Persian War (1722–1723). Despite the setbacks of Peter's campaign, this initial move encouraged the meliks in their resistance struggle against the Safavids and the Ottomans. However, it was not until the early 19th century that Eastern Armenia formally passed to Russian control, following the Russo-Persian War (1804–1813) and the Russo-Persian War (1826–1828). In the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan and the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay, Qajar Iran ceded to Russia the Karabakh, Erivan, and Nakhichevan Khanates. The Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) resulted in further gains for Russian Armenia, notably the regions of Kars and Ardahan.
Most of Western Armenia, however, remained under Ottoman rule. Within the Ottoman millet system, Armenians lived in relative harmony with other groups, including the ruling Turks. However, as Christians under a strict Muslim social structure, Armenians faced pervasive discrimination. In response to the 1894 Sasun rebellion, Sultan Abdul Hamid II organised state-sponsored massacres against the Armenians between 1894 and 1896, resulting in close to 200,000 deaths. The Hamidian massacres, as they came to be known, gave Abdul Hamid international infamy as the "Bloody Sultan" or the "Red Sultan".

During the 1890s, the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, commonly known as the Dashnaktsutyun, became active within the Ottoman Empire with the aim of unifying the various small groups in the empire that were advocating for reform and defending Armenian villages from massacres that were widespread in some of the Armenian-populated areas of the empire. Dashnaktsutyun members also formed Armenian fedayi groups that defended Armenian civilians through armed resistance. The Dashnaks also worked for the wider goal of creating a "free, independent and unified" Armenia, although they sometimes set aside this goal in favour of a more realistic approach, such as advocating autonomy.
The Ottoman Empire began to collapse, and in 1908, the Young Turk Revolution overthrew the government of Sultan Hamid. In April 1909, the Adana massacre occurred in the Adana Vilayet resulting in the deaths of as many as 20,000–30,000 Armenians. The Armenians living in the empire hoped that the Committee of Union and Progress would change their second-class status. The Armenian reform package (1914) was presented as a solution by appointing an inspector general over Armenian issues.

World War I and the Armenian genocide
The outbreak of World War I led to confrontation between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire in the Caucasus and Persian campaigns. The new government in Istanbul began to look on the Armenians with distrust and suspicion because the Imperial Russian Army contained a contingent of Armenian volunteers. On 24 April 1915, Armenian intellectuals were arrested by Ottoman authorities and, with the Tehcir Law (29 May 1915), eventually a large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia perished in what has become known as the Armenian genocide.
The genocide was implemented in two phases: the wholesale killing of the able-bodied male population through massacre and subjection of army conscripts to forced labour, followed by the deportation of women, children, the elderly and infirm on death marches leading to the Syrian desert. Driven forward by military escorts, the deportees were deprived of food and water and subjected to periodic robbery, rape, and massacre. There was local Armenian resistance in the region, developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire. The events of 1915 to 1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide.
Turkish authorities deny the genocide took place to this day. The Armenian genocide is acknowledged to have been one of the first modern genocides. According to the research conducted by Arnold J. Toynbee, an estimated 600,000 Armenians died during deportation from 1915 to 1916. This figure, however, accounts for solely the first year of the genocide and does not take into account those who died or were killed after the report was compiled on 24 May 1916. The International Association of Genocide Scholars places the death toll at "more than a million". The total number of people killed has been most widely estimated at between 1 and 1.5 million. Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for over 30 years. These events are traditionally commemorated yearly on 24 April, the Armenian Martyr Day, or the Day of the Armenian genocide.

First Republic of Armenia
The Imperial Russian Caucasus Army, commanded by Nikolai Yudenich, and the Armenian volunteer units, led by Andranik Ozanian and Tovmas Nazarbekian, succeeded in gaining much of Western Armenia during World War I. However, their gains were lost with the October Revolution of 1917. At the time, Russian-controlled Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan attempted to bond together in the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. This federation, however, lasted from only February to May 1918, when all three parties decided to dissolve it. As a result, the Dashnak-dominated government of Eastern Armenia declared its independence on 28 May as the First Republic of Armenia under the leadership of Aram Manukian.

The First Republic's short-lived independence was fraught with war, territorial disputes, ethnic unrest, Bolshevik rebellions, and a mass influx of refugees from Western Armenia, bringing with them disease and starvation. The Entente Powers sought to help the newly founded Armenian state through relief funds and other forms of support.
At the end of the war, the victorious powers sought to divide up the Ottoman Empire. Signed between the Allied Powers and the Ottoman Empire at Sèvres on 10 August 1920, the Treaty of Sèvres promised to maintain the existence of the Armenian republic and to attach the former territories of Western Armenia to it. Because the new borders of Armenia were to be drawn by United States President Woodrow Wilson, Western Armenia was also referred to as "Wilsonian Armenia". In addition, just days prior on 5 August, Mihran Damadian of the Armenian National Union, the de facto Armenian administration in Cilicia, declared the independence of Cilicia as an Armenian autonomous republic under French protectorate. There was even consideration of making Armenia a mandate under the protection of the United States. The treaty, however, was rejected by the Turkish National Movement and never came into effect.
In 1920, Turkish nationalist forces invaded the fledgling Armenian republic from the east. Under the command of Kâzım Karabekir, they captured the Armenian territories that Imperial Russia had annexed in 1878 and occupied Alexandropol (today Gyumri). Hostilities finally concluded with the Treaty of Alexandropol on 2 December 1920. The treaty forced Armenia to disarm most of its military forces and to cede all former Ottoman territory granted to it by the Treaty of Sèvres. Simultaneously, the 11th Red Army, led by Sergo Ordzhonikidze, invaded Armenia at Karavansarai (today Ijevan) on 29 November. By early December, Ordzhonikidze's forces entered Yerevan and the short-lived Armenian republic collapsed.
After the fall of the First Republic, the war communism policies of the new Soviet Armenian government led to the February Uprising of 1921. Following the defeat of that revolt, Armenian forces under the command of Garegin Nzhdeh established the Republic of Mountainous Armenia and continued to fight Soviet forces in the southern region of Zangezur. To end the rebellion, Soviet authorities pledged to include the Syunik Province within Armenia's borders. The Red Army soon took control of the region, driving the leaders of the revolt out of Armenia, across the Araks River into Iran on 15 July 1921.

Soviet Armenia
Sovietization to Stalinism
Following Armenia's Sovietization, the Treaty of Alexandropol was superseded by the Treaty of Moscow and the Treaty of Kars. In these agreements, Turkey renounced its claims on Batumi to Soviet Georgia in exchange for the provinces of Kars, Ardahan, and Surmalu, all of which had been under Turkish military control since the Turkish invasion of Armenia in 1920. The territory ceded to Turkey included the medieval Armenian capital Ani and Mount Ararat, the national symbol of the Armenian people. Together with Soviet Georgia and Soviet Azerbaijan, Soviet Armenia officially entered the USSR as part of the Transcaucasian SFSR (TSFSR) in March 1922. The TSFSR later split into three separate republics in December 1936 – the Armenian SSR, the Azerbaijan SSR, and the Georgian SSR.
Vladimir Lenin, who "favored a moderate policy in Armenia," appointed Alexander Miasnikian, an experienced administrator, to oversee affairs in the republic. During the era of the New Economic Policy (NEP), Armenia enjoyed a period of stability and cultural revival within the USSR, in contrast to the turbulent years of the First Republic. However, after the death of Lenin and the rise of Joseph Stalin to the Soviet leadership, the situation changed significantly. Armenians suffered greatly during Stalin's Great Purge, with Lavrentiy Beria playing an especially conspicuous role, beginning with the death of the popular Soviet Armenian leader Aghasi Khanjian in 1936. The repressions claimed the lives of major Armenian intellectual figures like Yeghishe Charents, Axel Bakunts, and Vahan Totovents. The Armenian Church also suffered in this period, culminating in the murder of the Armenian Catholicos Khoren I, an act for which Beria is usually held responsible.

Great Patriotic War and post-war period
Armenia was not the scene of any battles in the Great Patriotic War of World War II. Nevertheless, an estimated 500,000 Armenians (nearly a third of the population) served in the Red Army during the war, and 175,000 died. A total of 117 citizens of Soviet Armenia, including 10 non-Armenians, were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union. Six special military divisions were formed in Armenia in 1941–42. Five of them, the 89th, 409th, 408th, 390th, and 76th Divisions, would have a distinguished war record, while the sixth was ordered to stay in Armenia to guard the republic's western borders against a possible incursion by neighboring Turkey. The 89th Tamanyan Division, composed of ethnic Armenians, fought in the Battle of Berlin. Over 60 Armenians were promoted to the rank of general, while one attained the rank of Admiral (Ivan Isakov) and three achieved the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union (Ivan Bagramyan, Hamazasp Babadzhanian, and Sergei Khudyakov).
After the death of Stalin in 1953, Armenia experienced a new period of liberalization under Nikita Khrushchev's Thaw. In March 1954, two years before Khrushchev denounced Stalin, his close ally, the Armenian statesman Anastas Mikoyan, flew to Yerevan and called for the rehabilitation of Charents and the republication of the writers Raphael Patkanian and Raffi. During the Thaw, life in Soviet Armenia soon began to see rapid improvement with greater investment in housing and the consumer economy. The Armenian Church, which was limited under Stalin, was revived when Catholicos Vazgen I assumed the duties of his office in 1955. In 1962, the massive statue of Stalin that towered over Yerevan was pulled down from its pedestal by troops and replaced with that of Mother Armenia in 1967. That same year, a memorial to the victims of the Armenian genocide was built at the Tsitsernakaberd hill above the Hrazdan gorge in Yerevan. This occurred after mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event's fiftieth anniversary in 1965.

Glasnost and perestroika
Following the Brezhnev era, Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms of glasnost and perestroika witnessed a major national revival in Armenia with the rise of the Karabakh movement. Taking advantage of the new political climate, the Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast (NKAO) of Soviet Azerbaijan began to demand unification with Soviet Armenia, citing discrimination by Baku. Peaceful protests in Armenia supporting the Karabakh Armenians became common. By the beginning of 1988, nearly one million Armenians from several regions of the republic engaged in these demonstrations, centered on Yerevan's Theater Square (today Freedom Square). However, in neighboring Azerbaijan, violence against Armenians erupted in the city of Sumgait. Ethnic rioting soon broke out between Armenians and Azeris, preventing any peaceful resolution from taking place. Compounding Armenia's problems was a devastating earthquake in 1988 with a surface-wave magnitude of 6.8. Another major pogrom against Armenians in Baku in January 1990 forced almost all of the 200,000 Armenians in the Azerbaijani capital to flee to Armenia.
Gorbachev's inability to alleviate any of Armenia's problems created disillusionment among the Armenians and fed a growing hunger for independence. On 23 August 1990, Armenia declared its sovereignty on its territory. On 17 March 1991, Armenia, along with the Baltic states, Georgia and Moldova, boycotted a nationwide referendum in which 78% of all voters voted for the retention of the Soviet Union in a reformed form.

Post-Soviet independence
On 21 September 1991, Armenia officially declared its statehood after the failed August coup in Moscow in the Russian SFSR. Levon Ter-Petrosyan, who rose to prominence during the Karabakh movement, was popularly elected the first president of the newly independent Republic of Armenia in October 1991. The Soviet Union formally dissolved following the Belovezha Accords in December 1991 and Armenia's independence was recognised.
Ter-Petrosyan led Armenia alongside defence minister Vazgen Sargsyan through the First Nagorno-Karabakh War with neighbouring Azerbaijan. The initial post-Soviet years were marred by economic difficulties and a severe energy crisis. The latter was rooted in the early years of the Karabakh conflict when the Azerbaijani Popular Front managed to pressure the Azerbaijan SSR to instigate a railway and air blockade against Armenia. This move effectively debilitated Armenia's economy as 85% of its cargo and goods arrived through rail traffic. In 1993, Turkey joined the blockade against Armenia in support of Azerbaijan.
The first Karabakh war ended after a Russian-brokered ceasefire was concluded in 1994. The war was a success for the Karabakh Armenian forces who managed to capture practically the entire territory of the former NKAO as well as most of seven adjacent districts of Azerbaijan. The Armenian backed forces remained in control of almost all of that territory until 2020. By the time both Azerbaijan and Armenia had finally agreed to a ceasefire in 1994, an estimated 30,000 people had been killed and over a million had been displaced.

21st century
In the 21st century, Armenia continued to face many hardships. The 2018 Armenian Revolution was a series of anti-government protests in Armenia from April to May 2018 staged by various political and civil groups led by a member of the Armenian parliament — Nikol Pashinyan (head of the Civil Contract party). Protests and marches took place initially in response to Serzh Sargsyan's third consecutive term as President of Armenia and later against the Republican Party controlled government in general. Pashinyan declared the movement, which led to Sargsyan's resignation, a "velvet revolution".
In March 2018, the Armenian parliament elected Armen Sarkissian as the new President of Armenia. The controversial constitutional reform to reduce presidential power was implemented, while the authority of the prime minister was strengthened. In May 2018, parliament elected opposition leader Nikol Pashinyan as the new prime minister. His predecessor Serzh Sargsyan resigned two weeks earlier following widespread anti-government demonstrations.
On 27 September 2020, a full-scale war erupted due to the unresolved Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Both the armed forces of Armenia and Azerbaijan reported military and civilian casualties. The Nagorno-Karabakh ceasefire agreement to end the six-week war between Armenia and Azerbaijan was seen by many as Armenia's defeat and capitulation. The year-long March of Dignity protests forced early elections.
On 20 June 2021, Pashinyan's Civil Contract party won an early parliamentary election. Acting Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan was officially appointed to the post of prime minister by Armenia's President Armen Sarkissian. In January 2022, Armenian President Armen Sarkissian resigned from office, stating that the constitution no longer gives the president sufficient powers or influence. On 3 March 2022, Vahagn Khachaturyan was elected as the fifth president of Armenia in the second round of parliamentary vote. The next month yet more protests broke out.

2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh
Between 19 and 20 September 2023, Azerbaijan launched a large-scale military offensive against the self-declared breakaway state of Artsakh, a move seen by the European Parliament as a violation of the 2020 ceasefire agreement. The offensive took place in the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh, which is internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan, but populated by Armenians. The attacks occurred in the midst of an escalating crisis caused by Azerbaijan blockading Artsakh, which resulted in significant scarcities of essential supplies such as food, medicine, and other goods in the affected region.
One day after the offensive started, on 20 September, a ceasefire agreement was reached at the mediation of the Russian peacekeeping command in Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan held a meeting with representatives of the Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians on 21 September in Yevlakh, to be followed by another meeting in October. Ceasefire violations by Azerbaijan were nonetheless reported by both Artsakhi residents and officials.
Human rights organisations and experts in genocide prevention issued multiple alerts, stating that the region's Armenian population was at risk or actively being subjected to ethnic cleansing and genocide. Luis Moreno Ocampo, a former prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, warned that another Armenian genocide could take place, and attributed the inaction of the international community to encouraging Azerbaijan that it would face no serious consequences.
On 8 August 2025, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan and Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev signed a joint declaration at the White House, committing to a peace deal facilitated by the Trump administration that would end nearly four decades of conflict between the two countries.

Geography
Armenia is a landlocked country in the geopolitical Transcaucasus (South Caucasus) region, that is located in the Southern Caucasus Mountains and their lowlands between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea, and northeast of the Armenian Highlands. Armenia is widely accepted as part of West Asia geographically, although other definitions place it either fully in Europe or across Europe and Asia. Located on the Armenian Highlands, it is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, the Lachin corridor which is a part of Lachin District that is under the control of a Russian peacekeeping force and Azerbaijan proper to the east, and Iran and Azerbaijan's exclave of Nakhchivan to the south. Armenia lies between latitudes 38° and 42° N, and meridians 43° and 47° E. It contains two terrestrial ecoregions: Caucasus mixed forests and Eastern Anatolian montane steppe.

Topography
Armenia has a territorial area of 29,743 square kilometres (11,484 sq mi). The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers, and few forests. The land rises to 4,090 metres (13,419 feet) above sea level at Mount Aragats, and no point is below 390 metres (1,280 ft) above sea level. Average elevation of the country area is tenth highest in the world and it has 85.9% mountain area, more than Switzerland or Nepal.
Mount Ararat, which was historically part of Armenia, is the highest mountain in the region at 5,137 meters (16,854 feet). Now located in Turkey, but clearly visible from Armenia, it is regarded by the Armenians as a symbol of their land. Because of this, the mountain is present on the Armenian national emblem today.

Climate
The climate in Armenia is markedly highland continental. Summers are hot, dry and sunny, lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature fluctuates between 22 and 36 °C (72 and 97 °F). However, the low humidity level mitigates the effect of high temperatures. Evening breezes blowing down the mountains provide a welcome refreshing and cooling effect. Springs are short, while autumns are long. Autumns are known for their vibrant and colourful foliage.
Winters are quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures ranging between −10 and −5 °C (14 and 23 °F). Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing down the hills of Tsaghkadzor, located thirty minutes outside Yerevan. Lake Sevan, nestled up in the Armenian highlands, is the second largest lake in the world relative to its altitude, at 1,900 metres (6,234 ft) above sea level.

Environment
Armenia ranked 63rd out of 180 countries on Environmental Performance Index (EPI) in 2018. Its rank on subindex Environmental Health (which is weighted at 40% in EPI) is 109, while Armenia's rank on subindex of Ecosystem Vitality (weighted at 60% in EPI) is 27th best in the world. This suggests that main environmental issues in Armenia are with population health, while environment vitality is of lesser concern. Out of sub-subindices contributing to Environmental Health subindex ranking on Air Quality to which population is exposed is particularly unsatisfying.
In Armenia forest cover is around 12% of the total land area, equivalent to 328,470 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 334,730 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 310,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 18,470 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 5% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.
Waste management in Armenia is underdeveloped, as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at Armenia's 60 landfills. A waste processing plant is scheduled for construction near Hrazdan city, which will allow for closure of 10 waste dumps.
Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia (especially hydroelectric and wind power) and calls from EU officials to shut down the nuclear power plant at Metsamor, the Armenian Government is exploring the possibilities of installing new small modular nuclear reactors. In 2018 existing nuclear plant is scheduled for modernisation to enhance its safety and increase power production by about 10%.

Government and politics
Armenia is a representative parliamentary democratic republic. The Armenian constitution adhered to the model of a semi-presidential republic until April 2018.
According to the current Constitution of Armenia, the President is the head of state holding largely representational functions, while the Prime Minister is the head of government and exercises executive power.
Since 1995, legislative power is vested in the Azgayin Zhoghov or National Assembly, which is a unicameral parliament consisting of 105 members.
Since its first report in 2006 until its most recent in 2019, the Fragile States Index has consistently ranked Armenia better than all its neighboring countries (with one exception in 2011).
Armenia has universal suffrage from the age of 18.

Administrative divisions
Armenia is divided into ten provinces (marzer, singular marz), with the city (kaghak) of Yerevan (Երևան) having special administrative status as the country's capital. The chief executive in each of the ten provinces is the marzpet (marz governor), appointed by the government of Armenia. In Yerevan, the chief executive is the mayor, elected since 2009.
Within each province there are communities (hamaynkner, singular hamaynk). Each community is self-governing and consists of one or more settlements (bnakavayrer, singular bnakavayr). Settlements are classified as either towns (kaghakner, singular kaghak) or villages (gyugher, singular gyugh). As of 2007, Armenia includes 915 communities, of which 49 are considered urban and 866 are considered rural. The capital, Yerevan, also has the status of a community. Additionally, Yerevan is divided into twelve semi-autonomous districts.

Foreign relations
Armenia became a member of the United Nations on 2 March 1992, and is a signatory to a number of its organisations and other international agreements. Armenia is also a member of international organisations such as the Council of Europe, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Political Community, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the World Customs Organization, the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and La Francophonie. It is a member of the CSTO military alliance, and also participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace programme and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council. In 2004, its forces joined KFOR, a NATO-led international force in Kosovo. Armenia is also an observer member of the Arab League, the Organization of American States, the Pacific Alliance, the Non-Aligned Movement, and a dialogue partner in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. As a result of its historical ties to France, Armenia was selected to host the biennial Francophonie summit in 2018.
Armenia has a difficult relation with neighbouring countries Azerbaijan and Turkey. Tensions were running high between Armenians and Azerbaijanis during the final years of the Soviet Union. The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict dominated the region's politics throughout the 1990s. To this day, Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan are under a severe blockade. In addition, a permanent solution for the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has not been reached despite the mediation provided by organisations such as the OSCE.
Turkey also has a long history of poor relations with Armenia over its refusal to acknowledge the Armenian genocide, even though it was one of the first countries to recognize the Republic of Armenia (the third republic) after its independence from the USSR in 1991. Despite this, for most of the 20th century and early 21st century, relations remain tense and there are no formal diplomatic relations between the two countries due to Turkey's refusal to establish them for numerous reasons. During the first Nagorno-Karabakh War, and citing it as the reason, Turkey closed its border with Armenia in 1993. It has not lifted its blockade despite pressure from the powerful Turkish business lobby interested in Armenian markets.

On 10 October 2009, Armenia and Turkey signed protocols on the normalisation of relations, which set a timetable for restoring diplomatic ties and reopening their joint border. The ratification of those had to be made in the national parliaments. In Armenia, before sending the protocols to the parliament, it was sent to the Constitutional Court to have their constitutionality to be approved. The Constitutional Court made references to the preamble of the protocols underlying three main issues. One of them stated that the implementation of the protocols did not imply Armenia's official recognition of the existing Turkish-Armenian border established by the Treaty of Kars. By doing so, the Constitutional Court rejected one of the main premises of the protocols, i.e. "the mutual recognition of the existing border between the two countries as defined by relevant treaties of international law". This was for the Turkish Government the reason to back down from the Protocols. The Armenian President had made multiple public announcements, both in Armenia and abroad, that, as the leader of the political majority of Armenia, he assured the parliamentary ratification of the protocols if Turkey also ratified them. Despite this, the process stopped, as Turkey continuously added more preconditions to its ratification and also "delayed it beyond any reasonable time-period".
Armenia maintains close cultural, economic, and security ties with Russia. Due to the republic's position between two hostile neighbours, the security component is especially important. At the request of the Armenian government, Russia maintains a military base in the city of Gyumri in northwestern Armenia as a deterrent against NATO member Turkey. At the same time, Armenia has friendly relations with the United States, which is home to the second largest Armenian diaspora community in the world after Russia. According to the US Census Bureau, there are 427,822 Armenian Americans in the country.

Because of the illicit border blockades by Azerbaijan and Turkey, Armenia also maintains strong relations with its southern neighbour, Iran, especially in the economic sector. Economic projects are being developed between the two nations, including a gas pipeline going from Iran to Armenia.
Armenia is a member of the Council of Europe and maintains close relations with the European Union; especially with its member states France and Greece. In January 2002, the European Parliament noted that Armenia may enter the EU in the future. A 2005 survey reported that 64% of Armenians favoured joining the EU, a move multiple Armenian officials have voiced support for.
A former Soviet republic and an emerging democracy, Armenia was negotiating to become an associate EU partner and had completed negotiations to sign an Association Agreement with a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the EU in 2013. However, the government opted not to finalize the agreement, and instead joined the Eurasian Economic Union. Despite this, Armenia and the EU finalized the Armenia-EU Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) on 24 November 2017. The agreement enhances the relationship between Armenia and the EU to a new partnership level, further develops cooperation in economic, trade and political areas, aims to improve investment climate, and is designed to bring Armenian law gradually closer to the EU acquis.
Legally speaking, Armenia has the right to be considered as a prospective EU member provided it meets necessary standards and criteria, though officially such a plan does not exist in Brussels. Armenia is included in the EU's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) and participates in both the Eastern Partnership and the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
Following the 2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, Armenia's relations with a long-term ally Russia started to deteriorate. In February 2024, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan said that the CSTO "hasn't fulfilled its security obligations towards Armenia" and that "in practice we have basically frozen our participation in the CSTO". On 28 February 2024, during a speech made in the National Assembly, Pashinyan further stated that the CSTO is "a threat to the national security of Armenia". In March 2024, Armenia officially expelled Russian border guards from the Zvartnots International Airport in Yerevan.
On 2 March 2024, Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan advised that Armenia would officially "apply to become a candidate for EU membership in the coming days, within a month at most". On 5 March, Pashinyan stated that Armenia would apply for EU candidacy by Autumn 2024 at the latest. On 8 March 2024, Armenian Foreign Minister Ararat Mirzoyan stated, "Armenia is seeking to get closer to the West amid worsening relations with Russia" and "New opportunities are largely being discussed in Armenia nowadays, that includes membership in the European Union".
On 12 February 2025, Armenia's parliament approved a bill officially endorsing Armenia's EU accession. The decision for the government to pass the bill was reported to be the first step of "the beginning of the accession process of Armenia to the European Union".

Military
The Armenian Army and Air Force are the two branches of the Armed Forces of Armenia. The Armenian military was formed after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and with the establishment of the Ministry of Defence in 1992. The Commander-in-Chief of the military is the Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan. The Ministry of Defence is in charge of political leadership, headed by Davit Tonoyan, while military command remains in the hands of the general staff, headed by the Chief of Staff, who is Lieutenant-General Onik Gasparyan.
Active forces number about 81,000 soldiers, with an additional reserve of 32,000 troops. Armenian border guards are in charge of patrolling the country's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and Turkey. In the case of an attack, Armenia is able to mobilize every able-bodied man between the age of 15 and 59, with military preparedness.
The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment, was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992. In March 1993, Armenia signed the multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention, which calls for the eventual elimination of chemical weapons. Armenia acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993. Armenia is a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO). Armenia also has an Individual Partnership Action Plan with NATO and it participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PiP) programme and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC).

Human rights and freedom
Armenia scored 5.63 on The Economist Democracy Index, published in January 2023 (data for 2022). Although still classified as "hybrid regime", Armenia recorded the strongest improvement among European countries and reached its ever-best score since calculation began in 2006.
Armenia is classified as "partly free" in the 2019 report (with data from 2018) by Freedom House, which gives it a score of 51 out of 100, which is 6 points ahead of the previous estimate.
Armenia recorded unprecedented progress in the 2019 World Press Freedom Index published by Reporters Without Borders, improving its position by 19 points and ranking 61st on the list. The publication also confirms the absence of cases of killed journalists, citizen journalists or media assistants.
Armenia ranks 26th in the 2022 report of The Human Freedom Index published by the American CATO Institute and Canada's Fraser Institute.
Armenia ranked 29th for economic freedom and 76th for personal freedom among 159 countries in the 2017 Human Freedom Index published by the Cato Institute.
In October 2023 Armenia ratified signing the Rome statute, whereby Armenia will become a full member of the International Criminal Court.

Economy
The economy relies heavily on investment and support from Armenians abroad. Before independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry-based – chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and textile – and highly dependent on outside resources. The republic had developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine tools, textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange for raw materials and energy.
Agriculture accounted for less than 20% of both net material product and total employment before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. After independence, the importance of agriculture in the economy increased markedly, its share at the end of the 1990s rising to more than 30% of GDP and more than 40% of total employment. This increase in the importance of agriculture was attributable to food security needs of the population in the face of uncertainty during the first phases of transition and the collapse of the non-agricultural sectors of the economy in the early 1990s. As the economic situation stabilised and growth resumed, the share of agriculture in GDP dropped to slightly over 20% (2006 data), although the share of agriculture in employment remained more than 40%.

Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority of energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic energy source is hydroelectric. Small deposits of coal, gas, and petroleum exist but have not yet been developed.
Access to biocapacity in Armenia is lower than world average. In 2016, Armenia had 0.8 global hectares  of biocapacity per person within its territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In 2016 Armenia used 1.9 global hectares of biocapacity per person—their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use double as much biocapacity as Armenia contains. As a result, Armenia is running a biocapacity deficit.
Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's economy suffers from the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being felt. The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved. Shutdown of the nuclear power plant in 1989 led to the Armenian energy crisis of 1990s. The GDP fell nearly 60% between 1989 and 1993, but then resumed robust growth after the power plant was reopened in 1995. The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first years after its introduction in 1993.
Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide-ranging economic reforms that paid off in dramatically lower inflation and steady growth. The 1994 ceasefire in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has also helped the economy. Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995, building on the turnaround that began the previous year, and inflation has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as precious-stone processing and jewelry making, information and communication technology and tourism are beginning to supplement more traditional sectors of the economy, such as agriculture.
This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are extending considerable grants and loans. Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed $1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit and stabilising the currency; developing private businesses; energy; agriculture; food processing; transportation; the health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone. The government joined the WTO on 5 February 2003. But one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains the Armenian diaspora, which finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public projects. Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the Western World.
A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a law on privatisation was adopted in 1997, as well as a programme of state property privatisation. Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including increasing revenue collection, improving the investment climate, and making strides against corruption. However, unemployment, which was 18.5% in 2015, still remains a major problem due to the influx of thousands of refugees from the Karabakh conflict.
In 2017, the economy grew by 7.5% due to rising copper prices.
In 2022, Armenia's GDP stood at $39.4 billion, and enjoyed an economic freedom index of 65.3, according to Heritage Organisation.
The Armenian economy is predicted to grow by 13% in 2022 due to a huge influx of Russian citizens. The IMF's preliminary forecast as of March 2022 predicted growth of 1.5% for the year.

Science and technology
Research spending is low in Armenia, averaging 0.25% of GDP over 2010–2013. However, the statistical record of research expenditure is incomplete, as expenditure by privately owned business enterprises is not surveyed in Armenia. The world average for domestic expenditure on research was 1.7% of GDP in 2013.

The country's Strategy for the Development of Science 2011–2020 envisions that 'by 2020, Armenia is a country with a knowledge-based economy and is competitive within the European Research Area with its level of basic and applied research.' It fixes the following targets:

Creation of a system capable of sustaining the development of science and technology;
Development of scientific potential, modernisation of scientific infrastructure;
Promotion of basic and applied research;
Creation of a synergistic system of education, science and innovation; and
Becoming a prime location for scientific specialisation in the European Research Area.
Based on this strategy, the accompanying Action Plan was approved by the government in June 2011. It defines the following targets:

Improve the management system for science and technology and create the requisite conditions for sustainable development;
Involve more young, talented people in education and research, while upgrading research infrastructure;
Create the requisite conditions for the development of an integrated national innovation system; and
Enhance international co-operation in research and development.

Although the Strategy clearly pursues a 'science push' approach, with public research institutes serving as the key policy target, it nevertheless mentions the goal of establishing an innovation system. However, the main driver of innovation, the business sector, is not mentioned. In between publishing the Strategy and Action Plan, the government issued a resolution in May 2010 on Science and Technology Development Priorities for 2010–2014. These priorities are:

Armenian studies, humanities and social sciences;
Life sciences;
Renewable energy, new energy sources;
Advanced technologies, information technologies;
Space, Earth sciences, sustainable use of natural resources; and
Basic research promoting essential applied research.
The Law on the National Academy of Sciences was adopted in May 2011. This law is expected to play a key role in shaping the Armenian innovation system. It allows the National Academy of Sciences to extend its business activities to the commercialisation of research results and the creation of spin-offs; it also makes provision for restructuring the National Academy of Sciences by combining institutes involved in closely related research areas into a single body. Three of these new centres are particularly relevant: the Centre for Biotechnology, the Centre for Zoology and Hydro-ecology and the Centre for Organic and Pharmaceutical Chemistry.
The government is focusing its support on selected industrial sectors. More than 20 projects have been cofunded by the State Committee of Science in targeted branches: pharmaceuticals, medicine and biotechnology, agricultural mechanisation and machine building, electronics, engineering, chemistry and, in particular, the sphere of information technology.
Over the past decade, the government has made an effort to encourage science–industry linkages. The Armenian information technology sector has been particularly active: a number of public–private partnerships have been established between companies and universities, in order to give students marketable skills and generate innovative ideas at the interface of science and business. Examples are Synopsys Inc. and the Enterprise Incubator Foundation. Armenia was ranked 59th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Demographics
Armenia has a population of 3,081,100 as of 2025. It is the third most densely populated of the former Soviet republics. The country has faced population decline since the breakup of the USSR due to high levels of emigration; the population peaked at 3.6 million in 1991. However, since 2012, the emigration rate has slowed, and some population growth has been observed.

Armenia has a relatively large external diaspora—8 million by some estimates, greatly exceeding the 3 million people in Armenia itself—which is dispersed across the globe. The largest Armenian communities outside of Armenia are in Russia (1.1 million–2.9 million), the United States (1 million–1.5 million), and France (250,000–750,000); sizable numbers are also found in Georgia, Syria, Lebanon, Australia, Canada, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Poland, Ukraine, and Brazil. Roughly 40,000 to 70,000 Armenians still live in Turkey (mostly in and around Istanbul), not including between 500,000 and 3 million Turkish citizens who have "hidden" Armenian ancestry.
About 1,000 Armenians reside in the Armenian Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem, a remnant of a once-larger community. Italy is home to the San Lazzaro degli Armeni, an island located in the Venetian Lagoon, which is completely occupied by a monastery run by the Mechitarists, an Armenian Catholic congregation.
Approximately 139,000 Armenians lived in the de facto independent country Republic of Artsakh, where they formed a majority before 1 October 2023, when almost the entire population fled to Armenia.

Cities
Ethnic groups
Ethnic Armenians make up 98.1% of the population. Yazidis make up 1.1%, and Russians 0.5%. Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians, Greeks (usually called Caucasus Greeks), Kurds, Georgians, Belarusians, and Jews. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also exist though they are heavily Russified. As of 2022, there are 31,077 Yazidis in Armenia.
During the Soviet era, Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest population in the country, numbering 76,550 in 1922, and forming about 2.5% in 1989. However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan. Conversely, Armenia received a large influx of Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan, thus giving Armenia a more homogeneous character.
According to Gallup research conducted in 2017 Armenia has one of the highest migrant acceptance (welcoming) rates in eastern Europe.

Languages
Armenians have their own distinct alphabet and language, which is the only official language. The alphabet, invented by Mesrop Mashtots, consists of thirty-nine letters, three of which were added during the Cilician period. The main foreign languages that Armenians know are Russian and English. Due to its Soviet past, most of the old population can speak Russian quite well. According to a 2013 survey, 95% of Armenians said they had some knowledge of Russian (24% advanced, 59% intermediate) compared to 40% who said they knew some English (4% advanced, 16% intermediate and 20% beginner). However, more adults (50%) think that English should be taught in public secondary schools than those who prefer Russian (44%).

Religion
The predominant religion of Armenia is Christianity. Its roots in the country go back to the 1st century AD, when it arrived by way of the apostles Thaddaeus and Bartholomew. Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, an event traditionally dated to AD 301. Over 93% of Christians in Armenia belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, which is in communion only with the churches comprising Oriental Orthodoxy—of which it is itself a member.
The Catholic Church maintains jurisdictions of both the Latin Church and Armenian Catholic Church in Armenia. Of note are the Mechitarists (also spelled "Mekhitarists" Armenian: Մխիթարեան), a congregation of Benedictine monks in the Armenian Catholic Church, founded in 1712 by Mekhitar of Sebaste. They are best known for their series of scholarly publications of ancient Armenian versions of otherwise lost ancient Greek texts.
Other Christian denominations include the Armenian Evangelical Church and the Pentecostal branches of the Protestant community. These include the Word of Life, the Armenian Brotherhood Church, the Baptists (which are known as one of the oldest existing denominations in Armenia, and were permitted by the authorities of the Soviet Union), and Presbyterians.
Armenia is also home to a Russian community of Molokans which practice a form of Spiritual Christianity originated from the Russian Orthodox Church.
The Yazidis, who live in the western part of the country, practice Yazidism. The world's largest Yazidi temple, Quba Mêrê Dîwanê, was completed in 2019 in the village of Aknalich.
There is a Jewish community in Armenia of approximately 750 people since independence with most emigrants leaving for Israel. There are currently two synagogues in Armenia – one in the capital, Yerevan, and the other in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.

Health care
Healthcare in Armenia has undergone significant changes since independence in 1991. Initially, the Soviet healthcare system was highly centralized and provided free medical assistance to all citizens. After independence, the healthcare system underwent reform and primary care services have been free of charge since 2006. Despite improvements in accessibility and the implementation of an Open Enrollment programme, out-of-pocket health expenditures remain high and corruption among healthcare professionals remains a concern. In 2019, healthcare became free for all citizens under the age of 18 and the number of people receiving free or subsidized care under the Basic Benefits Package was increased.
After a significant decline in earlier decades, crude birth rates in Armenia slightly increased from 13.0 (per 1000 people) in the year 1998 to 14.2 in 2015; this timeframe also showed a similar trajectory in the crude death rate, which grew from 8.6 to 9.3. Life expectancy at birth at 74.8 years was the 4th-highest among the Post-Soviet states in 2014.

Education
In medieval times, the University of Gladzor and University of Tatev took an important role for Armenian education.
A literacy rate of 100% was reported as early as 1960. In the communist era, Armenian education followed the standard Soviet model of complete state control (from Moscow) of curricula and teaching methods and close integration of education activities with other aspects of society, such as politics, culture, and the economy.
In the 1988–89 school year, 301 students per 10,000 were in specialized secondary or higher education, a figure slightly lower than the Soviet average. In 1989, some 58% of Armenians over age fifteen had completed their secondary education, and 14% had a higher education. In the 1990–91 school year, the estimated 1,307 primary and secondary schools were attended by 608,800 students. Another seventy specialised secondary institutions had 45,900 students, and 68,400 students were enrolled in a total of ten postsecondary institutions that included universities. In addition, 35% of eligible children attended preschools. In 1992 Armenia's largest institution of higher learning, Yerevan State University, had eighteen departments, including ones for social sciences, sciences, and law. Its faculty numbered about 1,300 teachers and its student population about 10,000 students. The National Polytechnic University of Armenia is operating since 1933.
In the early 1990s, Armenia made substantial changes to the centralised and regimented Soviet system. Because at least 98% of students in higher education were Armenian, curricula began to emphasise Armenian history and culture. Armenian became the dominant language of instruction, and many schools that had taught in Russian closed by the end of 1991. Russian was still widely taught, however, as a second language.
In 2014, the National Programme for Educational Excellence embarked on creating an internationally competitive and academically rigorous alternative educational programme (the Araratian Baccalaureate) for Armenian schools and increasing the importance and status of the teacher's role in society.
The Ministry of Education and Science is responsible for regulation of the sector. Primary and secondary education in Armenia is free, and completion of secondary school is compulsory. Higher education in Armenia is harmonized with the Bologna process and the European Higher Education Area. The Armenian National Academy of Sciences plays an important role in postgraduate education.
Schooling takes 12 years in Armenia and breaks down into primary (4 years), middle (5 years) and high school (3 years). Schools engage a 10-grade mark system. The government also supports Armenian schools outside of Armenia.
Gross enrollment in tertiary education at 44% in 2015 surpassed peer countries of the South Caucasus but remained below the average for Europe and Central Asia. However, public spending per student in tertiary education in GDP-ratio terms is one of the lowest for post-USSR countries (for which data was available).

Culture
Architecture
Armenian architecture, as it originates in an earthquake-prone region, tends to be built with this hazard in mind. Armenian buildings tend to be rather low-slung and thick-walled in design. Armenia has abundant resources of stone, and relatively few forests, so stone was nearly always used throughout for large buildings. Small buildings and most residential buildings were normally constructed of lighter materials, and hardly any early examples survive, as at the abandoned medieval capital of Ani.

Music and dance
The duduk, dhol, zurna, and kanun are common instruments in Armenian folk music. The 18th century bard Sayat Nova influenced the development of Armenian folk music. Armenian chant is a common form of religious music in Armenia. Under Soviet rule, the Armenian composer Aram Khatchaturian became internationally known for his music, including the "Sabre Dance" from his composition for the ballet Gayane.

Art
Yerevan Vernissage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square, bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid-week). The market offers woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus speciality. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted into assortment of jewellery and ornamental objects. Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of recent Russian manufacture – nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so on – are also available at the Vernissage.
Across from the Opera House, a popular art market fills another city park on the weekends. Armenia's long history as a crossroads of the ancient world has resulted in a landscape with numerous archaeological sites to explore. Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age and even Stone Age sites are all within a few hours' drive from the city. All but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original settings.

The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that date back to the Middle Ages, which indicate Armenia's rich tales and stories of the times. It houses paintings by many European masters as well. The Modern Art Museum, the Children's Picture Gallery, and the Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy collections of fine art on display in Yerevan. Moreover, many private galleries are in operation, with many more opening every year, featuring rotating exhibitions and sales.
On 13 April 2013, the Armenian government announced a change in law to allow freedom of panorama for 3D works of art.

Media
Television, magazines, and newspapers are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Armenia guarantees freedom of speech and Armenia ranks 61st in the 2020 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders, between Georgia and Poland. Armenia's press freedom rose considerably following the 2018 Velvet Revolution.
As of 2020, the biggest issue facing press freedom in Armenia is judicial harassment of journalists, specifically defamation suits and attacks on journalists' right to protect sources, as well as excessive responses to combat disinformation spread by social media users. Reporters Without Borders also cites continued concerns about lack of transparency regarding ownership of media outlets.

Cinema
Cinema in Armenia was officially established on 16 April 1923, with the founding of the Armenian State Committee of Cinema by a decree of the Soviet Armenian government.
Prior to this, the first Armenian film, titled "Haykakan Sinema", was produced in 1912 in Cairo by Armenian-Egyptian publisher Vahan Zartarian and premiered on 13 March 1913.
In March 1924 the first Armenian film studio, Armenfilm, was established in Yerevan, beginning with the documentary film "Soviet Armenia".
"Namus" directed by Hamo Beknazarian in 1925, was the first Armenian silent black-and-white film. Based on Alexander Shirvanzade's 1885 novel, it portrays the tragic fate of two lovers whose engagement is thwarted due to violations of "namus" (a tradition of honor), leading the girl's father to marry her to another man.
The first Armenian sound film, "Pepo," was directed by Hamo Beknazarian in 1935.

Sport
Competitively, Armenia has been successful in chess, weightlifting and wrestling at the international level. Armenia is also an active member of the international sports community, with full membership in the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). It also hosts the Pan-Armenian Games.
Prior to 1992, Armenians participated in the Olympics representing the USSR. As part of the Soviet Union, Armenia was very successful, winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings at the Olympics on numerous occasions. The first medal won by an Armenian in modern Olympic history was by Hrant Shahinyan (sometimes spelled as Grant Shaginyan), who won two golds and two silvers in gymnastics at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki. To highlight the level of success of Armenians in the Olympics, Shahinyan was quoted as saying:
"Armenian sportsmen had to outdo their opponents by several notches for the shot at being accepted into any Soviet team. But those difficulties notwithstanding, 90 percent of Armenian athletes on Soviet Olympic teams came back with medals."
Armenia first participated at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona under a unified CIS team, where it was very successful, winning three golds and one silver in weightlifting, wrestling and sharp shooting, despite only having five athletes. Since the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Armenia has participated as an independent nation.
Armenia participates in the Summer Olympic Games in boxing, wrestling, weightlifting, judo, gymnastics, track and field, diving, swimming and sharp shooting. It also participates in the Winter Olympic Games in alpine skiing, cross-country skiing and figure skating.
Football is also popular in Armenia. The most successful team was the FC Ararat Yerevan team of the 1970s who won the Soviet Cup in 1973 and 1975 and the Soviet Top League in 1973. The latter achievement saw FC Ararat gain entry to the European Cup where – despite a home victory in the second leg – they lost on aggregate at the quarter-final stage to eventual winner FC Bayern Munich. Armenia competed internationally as part of the USSR national football team until the Armenian national football team was formed in 1992 after the split of the Soviet Union. Armenia have never qualified for a major tournament although recent improvements saw the team to achieve 44th position in the FIFA World Rankings in September 2011. The national team is controlled by the Football Federation of Armenia. The Armenian Premier League is the highest level football competition in Armenia, and has been dominated by FC Pyunik in recent seasons. The league currently consists of eight teams and relegates to the Armenian First League.
Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have produced many successful footballers, including Henrikh Mkhitaryan, Youri Djorkaeff, Alain Boghossian, Andranik Eskandarian, Andranik Teymourian, Edgar Manucharyan, Khoren Oganesian and Nikita Simonyan. Djokaeff and Boghossian won the 1998 FIFA World Cup with France, Teymourian competed in the 2006 World Cup for Iran and Manucharyan played in the Dutch Eredivisie for Ajax. Mkhitaryan has been one of the most successful Armenian footballers in recent years, playing for international clubs such as Borussia Dortmund, Manchester United, Arsenal, A.S. Roma and currently for Inter Milan.
Wrestling has been a successful sport in the Olympics for Armenia. At the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Armen Nazaryan won the gold in the Men's Greco-Roman Flyweight (52 kg) category and Armen Mkrtchyan won the silver in Men's Freestyle Paperweight (48 kg) category, securing Armenia's first two medals in its Olympic history.
Traditional Armenian wrestling is called Kokh and practised in traditional garb; it was one of the influences included in the Soviet combat sport of Sambo, which is also very popular.
The government of Armenia budgets about $2.8 million annually for sports and gives it to the National Committee of Physical Education and Sports, the body that determines which programmes should benefit from the funds.
Due to the lack of success lately on the international level, in recent years, Armenia has rebuilt 16 Soviet-era sports schools and furnished them with new equipment for a total cost of $1.9 million. The rebuilding of the regional schools was financed by the Armenian government. $9.3 million has been invested in the resort town of Tsaghkadzor to improve the winter sports infrastructure because of dismal performances at recent winter sports events. In 2005, a cycling centre was opened in Yerevan with the aim of helping produce world class Armenian cyclists. The government has also promised a cash reward of $700,000 to Armenians who win a gold medal at the Olympics.
Armenia has also been very successful in chess, winning the World Champion in 2011 and the World Chess Olympiad on three occasions.

See also
Armenians
History of Armenia
Outline of Armenia

Notes
Source attribution
This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030​, 324–26, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing.

References
Bibliography
External links

Armenia on X 
 Wikimedia Atlas of Armenia
Key Development Forecasts for Armenia from International Futures

## Tourism in Armenia
Tourism in Armenia has been a key sector to the Armenian economy since the 1990s when tourist numbers exceeded half a million people visiting the country every year (mostly ethnic Armenians from the Diaspora). The Armenian Ministry of Economy reports that most international tourists come from Russia, EU states, the United States and Iran. Though relatively small in size, Armenia has four UNESCO world heritage sites.

Despite internal and external problems, the number of incoming tourists has been continually increasing since 2007. Armenia received 2.2 million international visitors in 2024, 4.6% below the record 2.3 million visitors recorded in 2023. Most tourists focus their trip in Yerevan, the capital, where the majority of travel agencies, attractions and hotels are located.
Outdoor activities, sightseeing and nature tourism seem to be the primary attractions. Tsaghkadzor, Jermuk, Dilijan are known as mountainous resorts, which are outside of the capital. Tourists stay at the hotels of those towns in order to engage in extended trips over all Armenia without returning to Yerevan every day. The classical sightseeing trips to Armenia are popular not only among tourists, but also with the local population. Mountaineering, camping, hiking and other kinds of outdoor activities are also common.

History
Since 2015
In February 2020, the UN's World Tourism Organization reported that Armenia is one of the world’s fastest growing tourist destinations according to the latest statistics. Armenia ranked 12th with 14.4% growth in the list of 20 fastest growing countries for tourism, according to data gathered.
French magazine Le Quotidien du tourisme mentioned Armenia as the most trending destination of 2020.
Yerevan was included in Booking.com's top 10 trending destinations for 2020.
In October 2019, chief executive of Ryanair stated that Armenia has become one of Europe's fastest growing tourist destinations, during an announcement of launching new Ryanair flight routes between several European cities and Armenia.
As per the 2019 Travel and Tourism competitiveness report, Armenia scored 7th-best in the world on the Hotel Price Index. It also scored 3rd-best in Europe on tourist-friendly visa requirements. Overall, Armenia scored 79th of 140 countries. Calculation of overall scores includes some controversial subcategories related to country size (e.g. number of large sports stadiums), estimates based on old data (like 2014 data for aircraft departures) and non-applicable data (in case of landlocked Armenia - quality of ports infrastructure). Out of 140 countries Armenia ranked: 50 on Enabling Environment Subindex, 74 on Travel & Tourism Policy and Enabling Conditions Subindex, 81 on Infrastructure Subindex, 103 on Natural and Cultural Resources and Business Travel Subindex.
Forbes Magazine listed Armenia among top budget travel destinations for 2019. Meanwhile, CNN has ranked Armenia's capital Yerevan as one of the top 20 most beautiful European cities.
In July 2019, the chairman of the Central Bank of Armenia, Artur Javadyan, stated that the average spending of tourists had increased by more than 17 per cent from 2013 to 2018 and roughly 300 new hotels opened over the last six years.
In 2018, receipts from international tourism amounted to $1.2 billion or $413 per capita. In per capita terms Armenia was ahead of Turkey and Azerbaijan, but behind Georgia.
In 2016, The Daily Telegraph rated Armenia as "Europe's best kept secret".
Currently, the majority of  tourists arriving in Armenia are from the member states of the European Union,  CIS countries including Russia and Kazakhstan, and also from Georgia, Iran, the United States and increasingly from Asia, in particular China, Japan, South Korea, the Philippines and India. In addition, due to ongoing cultural and education system reforms, thousands of students from India, Iran and Arabic countries started to visit Armenia in order to study in the main universities of Yerevan, especially at the Yerevan State Medical University, promoting further tourism.
Armenia also has the capability to hold both regional political and large-scale international conferences and events. For example, Armenia hosted the Plenary meeting of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly in 2015 as well as ongoing Eastern Partnership and CIS conferences. In October 2018, Armenia hosted the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Summit for the first time, where representatives of 54 countries participated. In November 2018, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation was held in Yerevan. In September 2019, Armenia hosted the European Heritage Days, Armenia also hosted the 2019 UEFA European Under-19 Championship in July and the World Information Technology and Services Alliance Congress for the first time, in which 2000 delegates from around 83 countries participated. Also in 2019, Armenia hosted the Eurasian Economic Union Summit in Yerevan, the CSTO Parliamentary Assembly, as well as the Summit of Minds international conference, making Armenia the first country to host the event outside of France.
In August 2020, the President of Armenia, Armen Sarksyan, announced that Armenia will host the sixth Starmus Festival from September 6 to 11, 2021. The event was sponsored by the President himself, as well as, the Ministry of Education and Science. The event brought together world-class scientists, artists, astronauts, and the general public to celebrate science communication and to share latest discoveries in a number of scientific fields.
In 2022, Armenia hosted the Junior Eurovision Song Contest.

2000-2015
Since the 2000s, a new page for Armenian tourism was opened. Diaspora Armenians from Russia, United States, Lebanon, France and other countries increasingly visited Armenia to see their independent homeland and free Artsakh. Also many foreigners from Europe and the United States started viewing Armenia as a tourist destination.
In addition, the increasing of visitors of Persians, Kurds and Iranian Azerbaijanis was a new concept for tourism in Armenia. Middle Eastern tourists started visiting Armenia since the 1990s, but in the 2000s visiting Armenia became more popular, especially for Iranians. Many Iranians enjoy celebrating Nowruz (Iranian New Year) in Armenia, which is held on the 21 March, and spend their summer and winter vacations in a country free of religious restrictions and greater freedoms. The number of tourists visiting Artsakh has seen increases as well.
Since 2012, new hotels were built in Armenia, and the old ones were reconstructed. ″Tufenkian″ hotels (in Yerevan, Tsapatagh, Dzoraget and Dilijan), ″National″, ″Paris″ hotels were built in Yerevan, ″Nairi″ and ″Silachi″ hotels were reopened, Marriott opened the second hotel in Tsaghkadzor, and in 2013, Hyatt opened two hotels - in Jermuk and Yerevan, Golden Palace was opened in Tsaghkadzor, later two more hotels - Opera Suite Hotel and Radisson Blu were opened in Yerevan. These were the best hotels, with 4 or 5 stars.
The number of visitors to Armenia increases also due to festivals and international competitions. Examples include, the annual Golden Apricot international film festival, the annual Aurora Prize for Awakening Humanity award shows, the 2011 Junior Eurovision Song Contest hosted in Armenia, the Birthright Armenia Program in which thousands of schoolchildren and students worldwide visit Armenia, and every four years, the Pan-Armenian Games are hosted in Armenia, in which thousands of competitors from across the Armenian Diaspora compete in various sporting events.

Government regulation
The tourism sector is regulated by the Tourism Committee, a department of the Ministry of Economy.
Armenia has made tourism a state level priority. Tourism is one of the principles of state policy as defined in the Tourism and Tourist Activities Law. The general purpose of state tourism policy is to expand tourism's contribution to the national economy's sustainable development and equal territorial economic growth, while also reducing poverty through maintaining high rates of growth in the number of inbound and domestic tourists, enhancing tourism-generated revenue by providing higher-value products and services and generating new job opportunities in the industry.
Effective tourism state policy development and execution, well-established public-private partnerships, and mutually beneficial international and regional cooperation have resulted in tremendous growth in the tourist sector over the previous decade. This expansion is seen in both the quantity and geographic spread of international tourist visits, as well as investment in hospitality and related infrastructure. Armenia's tourism business has grown significantly in the last five years, with an average growth of nearly 9%  per year in international tourist arrivals.

Statistics
In 2019 the number of incoming tourists increased by 15% to 1.93 million visitors.

Safety
Safety Index 2020 published by Numbeo ranks Armenia as 9th safest country in the world, at par with Switzerland.
Armenia ranked 94th on the Global Terrorism Index of 2019, better than nearly all Western European and Scandinavian countries (except for Portugal, Switzerland, Norway and Denmark). Armenia and Kazakhstan had the largest improvements in the Eurasia region.
Armenia is among the world's safest countries according to Gallup International's 2019 Law and Order report. Based on the outcomes of the survey aiming to identify the Countries/Areas Most Likely to Feel Safe, Armenia is ranked the 7th on the list of the 18 states appearing in the top positions. An estimated 89% of the respondents said they feel absolutely safe in Armenia. The country has thus shared the 6th-7th positions with Switzerland. In the main ranking, Armenia shares the 11th position along with countries like France, Ireland, Sweden and Japan.

Air travel
Regulation and statistics
Air traffic is regulated by the Civil Aviation Committee.
An agreement on "Comprehensive Air Transportation" was initiated with the EU, the ratification of which will liberalize Armenian market for all EU member states and introduce EU criteria ensuring predictable business for airlines.
The number of tourists arriving in the country by air transportation has been increasing yearly. In 2018, passenger flow at the two main airports of Armenia reached a record high of 2,856,673 million people. At the end of 2019, this figure further increased, surpassing 3,000,000 passengers for the first time.

Airports
The main airports used for commercial aviation are Yerevan's Zvartnots Airport and Gyumri's Shirak Airport.
Reconstruction of the previously defunct Syunik Airport near the town of Kapan was completed in December 2020, with flights expected to begin in January 2022. One way flights between Yerevan and Kapan should take 40 minutes and cost 20,000 dram, compared to 5 hours by taxi costing 6,000 dram, allowing easy access of tourists to southern Armenia and Artsakh.

Airlines
In October 2019, Ryanair begun selling tickets to Yerevan and Gyumri. WizzAir announced flights from Vienna and Vilnius commencing in April 2020. AirBaltic scheduled to resume flights to Yerevan in May 2020.
During June 2016 - August 2021, thirteen airlines began operating flights to Armenia and two have resumed flights: Armenia Aircompany, Brussels Airlines, Qatar Airways, Cham Wings, Air Cairo, Red Wings, Nordwind Airlines, Pobeda, Belavia (resumed flights), Czech Airlines (resumed flights), WizzAir, Ryanair, Eurowings, Condor (airline), and Lufthansa.

Sports and extreme activities
In 2011, the journal ″National Geographic Traveler″ qualified Armenia not only a historical and cultural, but also extreme touristic county.
Armenia has 85.9% mountain area, more than Switzerland or Nepal, opening large possibilities for active travelers.

Armenia has various offers for tourists interested in sports and extreme activities - such as skiing, mountaineering, camping, hiking, speleology tours, paragliding, zipline, balloon flights, helicopter tours and the current longest reversible aerial tramway in the world.
Armenia has favorable conditions for paragliding in independent and tandem flights. Owing to the height and rugged landscape, the country has various micro climates, creating perfect circumstances for paragliding. The first paragliding flights were held by the members of "Small Aviation Club of Armenia" in 1996. Later, in 2008, Armenian Paragliding Sport Federation was founded. Currently AVIS club and Sky club are most active.  They organize competitions, paragliding learning courses nowadays and tandem flights with flying season lasting from May to November. Tandem and free flights are mostly launched at mountains near Hatis, Aparan and Lake Sevan.  Depending on the weather conditions tandem flights last up to 20 minutes.

Ecotourism
Armenia is also a burgeoning ecotourism destination, with activities such as agrotourism, rural life experiences, rafting and biking. Popular ecotourism destinations include the villages of Kalavan, Urtsadzor; eco-lodging spots like Yenokavan, Lastiver and others.

UNESCO World Heritage Sites
There are some objects in Armenia which are in the official list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites:

There are also four tentative World Heritage Sites in Armenia:
The archaeological site of the city of Dvin, the basilica and archaeological site of Yererouk, the monasteries of Tatev and Tatevi, and the monastery of Noravank and the upper Amaghou Valley.

See also
Geography of Armenia
List of volcanoes in Armenia
Mountains of Armenia
Tourism in the Republic of Artsakh
Transport in Armenia
Visa policy of Armenia

References
External links

Wine Tourism in Armenia
Armenian Association of Professional Tourist Guides
Hidden Gems of Armenia
Machanents tourism and art

## Culture of Armenia
The culture of Armenia encompasses many elements that are based on the geography, literature, architecture, dance, and music of the Armenian people. Armenia is a majority  Christian country in the Caucasus.

Creative arts
Literature
Armenian literature began in 405 A.D. when Mesrop Mashtots created the Armenian alphabet, according to tradition, probably basing it on the Pahlavi and Greek alphabets. Movses Khorenatsi (Moses of Khorene) was a prominent Armenian writer of the 5th century and the author of the History of the Armenians.
Modern writers include the Russian-Armenian author, poet, and philosopher Mikael Nalbandian, who worked to create a new Armenian literary identity in the 19th century.

Dance
From the fifth to the third millennia B.C., in the higher regions of Armenia there are rock paintings of scenes of country dancing.
The energetic Armenian Yarkhushta is a martial dance mentioned in the medieval works of Movses Khorenatsi, Faustus of Byzantium, and Grigor Magistros. It has traditionally been danced by Armenian soldiers before combat engagements, partly for ritualistic purposes, and partly in order to cast off fear and boost battle spirit.
The dance is performed by men, who face each other in pairs. The key element of the dance is a forward movement when participants rapidly approach one another and vigorously clap onto the palms of hands of dancers in the opposite row.

Architecture
Classical Armenian architecture is divided into four separate periods. The first Armenian churches were built between the 4th and 7th centuries, beginning when the Armenian monarchy converted to Christianity and ending with the Arab invasion of Armenia. The early churches were mostly simple basilicas, some with side apses. By the 5th century the typical cupola cone in the center had become widely used. By the 7th century, centrally-planned churches were built with a more complicated niched buttress and radiating Hripsime style. By the time of the Arab invasion most of classical Armenian architecture had formed.

Carpets
Various rug fragments have been excavated in Armenia dating back to the 7th century BC or earlier. Complete rugs, or nearly complete rugs of this period have not yet been found. The oldest, single, surviving knotted carpet in existence is the Pazyryk carpet. Although claimed by many cultures, this square tufted carpet, almost perfectly intact, is considered by many experts to be of Caucasian, specifically Armenian, origin. The rug is woven using the Armenian double knot, and the red filaments color was made from Armenian cochineal. Traditionally, since ancient times the carpets were used in Armenia to cover floors, decorate interior walls, sofas, chairs, beds and tables. The Armenian words for carpet are "karpet" (Armenian: կարպետ) or "gorg" (Armenian: գորգ). Though both words in Armenian are synonymous, word "karpet" is mostly used for non-pile rugs and "gorg" is for a pile carpet. Though women historically dominated carpet-weaving in Armenian communities, several prominent carpet-weavers in Karabakh are known to have been men, and in some cases whole families took up the art. The oldest extant Armenian carpet from the region, referred to as Artsakh during the medieval era, is from the village of Banants (near Gandzak) and dates to the early 13th century. The first time that the Armenian word for pile carpets, gorg, was used in historical sources was in a 1242-1243 Armenian inscription on the wall of the Kaptavan Church in Artsakh.
Art historian Hravard Hakobyan notes that "Artsakh carpets occupy a special place in the history of Armenian carpet-making. Common themes and patterns found on Armenian carpets were the depiction of dragons and eagles. They were diverse in style, rich in color and ornamental motifs, and were even separated in categories depending on what sort of animals were depicted on them, such as artsvagorgs (eagle-carpets), vishapagorgs (dragon-carpets) and otsagorgs (serpent-carpets). The rug mentioned in the Kaptavan inscriptions is composed of three arches, "covered with vegatative ornaments", and bears an artistic resemblance to the illuminated manuscripts produced in Artsakh.
The art of carpet weaving was in addition intimately connected to the making of curtains as evidenced in a passage by Kirakos Gandzaketsi, a 13th-century Armenian historian from Artsakh, who praised Arzu-Khatun, the wife of regional prince Vakhtang Khachenatsi, and her daughters for their expertise and skill in weaving.
Armenian carpet was also renowned by foreigners who traveled to Artsakh; the Arab geographer and historian Al-Masudi noted that, among other works of art, he had never seen such carpets elsewhere in his life.

Art
The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that date back to the Middle Ages. The National Gallery of Armenia, Modern Art Museum of Yerevan, and the Matenadaran are three examples of museums displaying various forms of visual art.

Lacemaking
Like Lacis, Armenian needlelace seems to be an obvious descendant of netmaking. Where lacis adds decorative stitches to a net ground, Armenian needlelace involves making the net itself decorative. There is some archaeological evidence suggesting the use of lace in prehistoric Armenia and the prevalence of pre-Christian symbology in traditional designs would certainly suggest a pre-Christian root for this art form.
In contrast to Europe where lace was the preserve of the nobility, in Armenia it decorated everything from traditional headscarves to lingerie. Thus lacemaking was part of many women's lives.

Theatre
Born in Cairo, Egypt, Atom Egoyan is now an internationally known filmmaker who is celebrated for his contemporary work, including personal feature films and other related projects. He is the winner of many awards at international film festivals, such as the Grand Prix and international Critics' Awards from the Cannes Film Festival and two Academy Award nominations for "The Sweet Hereafter". Egoyan has also worked in the television and theatre industries, producing Wagner's Die Walkure which was performed by the Canadian Opera Company in April 2004. Egoyan's creation Ararat (2002) is about the 1915 Armenian Genocide perpetrated by the Ottoman Empire. It depicts the consequences and suffering of a child survivor Arshile Gorky, and is an incredibly made-movie for both Armenians and non-Armenians.

Music
One of the most important parts of Armenian culture is the music, which has brought new forms of music in recent years, while maintaining traditional styles too. This is evidenced by the world-class Armenian Philharmonic Orchestra that performs at the beautifully refurbished Aram Khachaturian Concert Hall in the Yerevan Opera House, where one can also attend a full season of opera. In addition, several chamber ensembles are highly regarded for their musicianship, including the Komitas Quartet, Hover Chamber Choir, National Chamber Orchestra of Armenia and the Serenade Orchestra. Classical music can also be heard at one of several smaller venues, including the Yerevan State Musical Conservatory, the Komitas Chamber Music Hall and the Komitas Museum. Jazz is popular in Armenia, especially in the summer when live performances are a regular occurrence at one of the city's many outdoor cafés and parks. Armenian rock has made its input to the rock culture. The most known Armenian traditional instrument is the Ծիրանափող, meaning apricot flute, also known as duduk (pronounced [duˈduk] or doo-dook).
Modern day Armenian artists have incorporated folk music into more modern jazz and rock genres so that the traditional music still influences their creations, such as Zartong a late 70's Armenian progressive folk band based out of France.
Inga and Anush Arshakyans are an unexpected duo who create ethno, contemporary tracks that are also full of Armenian spirit. After graduating from the Yerevan State Conservatory, the singers started performing together on the professional stage in 2000. Later, in 2009 Inga & Anush represented Armenia in the Eurovision Song Contest in Moscow. They ended up taking the tenth place with 92 points. Their music is a balanced fusion of Armenian folk music, rock, jazz and other contemporary genres.
Another singer from Yerevan, Armenia who is popular among young adults is Armen Gondrachyan, more famously known as 'Armenchik'. The influence of his father, who was also a singer, inspired Armen to start singing at the young age of seven. In 1989, Armen and his family moved to the United States, while in 1995, at the age of fifteen, he found a band and recorded his first album. In 1988, Armen went back to his hometown in Armenia and lived there for a year, and at the same time released the album, "Armen, memories from Armenia." This release initiated his path to star-dom. With his current fame, Armen is still very dedicated to the Armenian community. It was in October 2003 that he had his first concert in Glendale, California. The concert was a sellout, and in that same year, Armen received an award for the best-selling album of the year, "Anunt Inche".
Isabel Bayrakdarian is an opera singer of Armenian descent and is now known and popular both among Armenians and non-Armenians. She graduated from the University of Toronto with a degree in biomedical engineering, but has become very successful in North America as an opera singer and an active concertizer. She is featured on the Grammy-award-winning soundtrack of the film, the Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers. Bayrakdarian is also the winner of four Juno Awards for Best Classical Album (Vocal). Further, she is a featured vocalist of Atom Egoyan's movie, Ararat, in collaboration with the band "Delerium", which brought in another Grammy nomination.
Şahan Arzruni is an internationally renowned concert pianist, born in Istanbul, Turkey. Through his live performances and sound recordings he has disseminated the Armenian piano music throughout the world. He has some two dozen recordings, devoted mostly to the works of Armenian composer. Arzruni is also an author, a lecturer, a producer and impresario. He has been awarded two medals by the Armenian government for furthering Armenian culture. He lives in New York City.
Since 2014, The Naghash Ensemble has been touring in Europe performing new music by American-Armenian composer John Hodian based on sacred Armenian poetry by the medieval painter, poet and priest Mkrtich Naghash. With three female vocalists, duduk, oud, dhol and piano, The Naghash Ensemble combines new classical music and post-minimaslism with Armenian folk and spiritual music.

Cinema
Soviet Armenia (1924) was the first Armenian documentary film. Namus was the first Armenian silent black and white film (1926, Namus at IMDb ), directed by Hamo Beknazarian and based on a play of Alexander Shirvanzade describing the ill fate of two lovers, who were engaged by their families to each other since childhood, but because of violations of namus (a tradition of honor), the girl was married by her father. In 1969, Sergei Parajanov created The Color of Pomegranates.

Cuisine
Armenian cuisine is as ancient as the history of Armenia, and is known for often having a distinct smell. Closely related to Eastern European and Mediterranean cuisine, various spices, vegetables, fish, and fruits combine to present unique dishes. Armenia is also famous for its wine and brandy. In particular, Armenian cognac is renowned worldwide (winner of several awards), and was considered by the late British Prime Minister, Sir Winston Churchill, as his favourite.
A very important aspect of the Armenian cuisine is the traditional bread called Lavash. In 2014, "Lavash, the preparation, meaning and appearance of traditional bread as an expression of culture in Armenia" was included in the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
The Armenian soup, Khash, also has its own, unique place in the Armenian cuisine. The name khash originates from the Armenian verb khashél (Armenian: խաշել), which means "to boil." The dish, initially called khashoy, is mentioned by a number of medieval Armenian authors, e.g. Grigor Magistros (11th century), Mkhitar Heratsi (12th century), Yesayi Nchetsi (13th century), etc.
The pomegranate, with its symbolic association with fertility represents that nation. The apricot is the national fruit. Since Roman times, the apricot was known as Prunus Armeniaca, literally translated as " Armenian Plum".
According to encyclopedia.com, "a popular Armenian drink to this day is tan, a mixture of water and soured yogurt".

Language
The Armenian language dates to the early period of Indo-European differentiation and dispersion some 5000 years ago, or perhaps as early as 7,800 years ago according to some recent research. Trade and conquest forced the language to change, adding new words into the people's vocabulary. Literature and books written in Armenian appeared by the 4th century. The written language of that time, called classical Armenian or grabar, remained the Armenian literary language, with various changes, until the 19th century. Meanwhile, spoken Armenian developed independently of the written language. Many dialects appeared when Armenian communities became separated by geography or politics, and not all of these dialects are mutually intelligible. English is a popular language in the business world.

Religion
The dominant religion in Armenia is Christianity and the Armenian Apostolic Church is the national church of Armenia.

Sports
A wide array of sports are played in Armenia. Football is the most popular sport in Armenia. Other popular sports are wrestling, weightlifting, judo, chess, and boxing. Armenia's mountainous terrain provides great opportunities for the practice of sports like skiing and rock climbing. Being a landlocked country, water sports can only be practiced on lakes, notably Lake Sevan. Competitively, Armenia has been very successful at chess, weightlifting, and wrestling at the international level. Armenia is also an active member of the international sports community, with full membership in the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA), Federation of International Bandy (FIB), and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). It also hosts the Pan-Armenian Games.
In Post-Soviet countries, the Armenian football players are well known for their skills and well developed techniques. This is mainly due to the success of the Armenian players such as, Khoren Hovhannisyan, Eduard Markarov, Levon Ishtoyan, Nikita Simonyan, etc. One of the biggest successes of Armenian club was the took place in the golden year of 1973, where the famous Armenian club Ararat Yerevan took both, the title of the Soviet Top League and the Soviet Cup.
Since independence, Armenia has been very successful in chess. Armenia's men team have won the Chess Olympiad 3 times, making them 5th most successful team in chess world history. Famous chess players, such as Tigran Petrosyan and Garry Kasparov are both of Armenian origins.

See also
Armenian dress
Armenian jewelry
Culture of Artsakh
History of Armenia
Lists of Armenians
List of libraries in Armenia
List of museums in Armenia

References
External links
Music & Dance, By Robert Atayan, Hye Etch

Books
Nina G. Garsoïan. Church and Culture in Early Medieval Armenia. — Ashgate, 1999.
Vrej Nersessian, Tim Greenwood. Art of the Armenians. — Sam Fogg, 2004.
Nira Stone, Michael E. Stone. The Armenians: Art, Culture and Religion. — Chester Beatty Library, 2007.
On folktales:

Seklemian, A. G. The Golden Maiden and Other Folk Tales and Fairy Stories Told in Armenia. Cleveland and New York: The Helman-Taylor Company. 1898.
Macler, Frédéric. Contes arméniens. Paris: Ernest Leroux Editeurs. 1905.
Hoogasian-Villa, Susie. 100 Armenian Tales and Their Folkloristic Relevance. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. 1966.
Surmelian, Leon. Apples of Immortality: Folktales of Armenia. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 1968.
Downing, Charles. Armenian Folk-tales and Fables. London: Oxford University Press. 1972. ISBN 0-19-274117-9.
Avakian, Anne M. Armenian Folklore Bibliography. University of California Press. 1994. ISBN 9780520097940.

## Cuisine of Armenia
Armenian cuisine (Armenian: Հայկական խոհանոց) includes traditional Armenian food and beverages, as well as Armenian cooking techniques. The cuisine reflects the history and geography of where Armenians have lived and where Armenian empires existed. The cuisine also reflects the traditional crops and animals grown and raised in Armenian-populated, or controlled areas. The preparation of meat, fish, and vegetable dishes in an Armenian kitchen often requires stuffing, stewing, grilling, baking, boiling and puréeing. Lamb, eggplant, and bread (lavash) are basic features of Armenian cuisine. Armenians traditionally prefer cracked wheat to maize and rice. The flavor of the food often relies on the quality and freshness of the ingredients rather than on excessive use of spices.
Fresh herbs are used extensively, both in the food and as accompaniments. Dried herbs are used in the winter when fresh herbs are not available. Wheat is the primary grain and is found in a variety of forms, such as whole wheat, shelled wheat, cracked wheat, buckwheat, bulgur, semolina, farina, and flour (pokhindz). Historically, rice was used mostly in the cities and in certain rice-growing areas (such as Marash and the region around Yerevan). Legumes are used liberally, especially chick peas, lentils, white beans, green beans and kidney beans. Nuts are used both for texture and to add nutrition to Lenten dishes. Of primary usage are not only walnuts, almonds, and pine nuts, but also hazelnuts, pistachios (in Cilicia), and nuts from regional trees.
Vegetables used in Armenian dishes and popular amongst Armenians include sorrel (aveluk), bell peppers, lettuce, cabbage, carrots, cucumbers, armenian cucumbers, eggplants, mushrooms, radish, okra, zucchinis, olives, potatoes, pumpkins, tomatoes, onions and maize.
Fresh fruits and dried fruits are used both as main ingredients and sour agents, or minor ingredients. As main ingredients, the following fruits are used: Apricots (prunus armeniaca; fresh and dried), quince, melons (mostly watermelons and honeydews), apples and others. As sour agents, or minor ingredients, the following fruits are used: sumac berries (in dried, powdered form), grapes (also dried as raisins), plums (either sour or dried as prunes), pomegranates, cherries (especially sour cherries, cornelian cherries and yellow cherries), lemons, damsons, hawthorns, raspberries, pears, oranges, blackberries, barberries, sea buckthorns, peaches, rose hips, nectarines, figs, strawberries, blueberries, blackberries and mulberries.
Armenians also use a large array of leaves In addition to grape leaves, cabbage leaves, chard, beet leaves, radish leaves, sorrel leaves, and strawberry leaves. These are mostly used for the purpose of being stuffed, or filled.

Background
A typical spread in an Armenian household might consist of butter, buttermilk, armenian breads, armenian cheeses, armenian condiments, matzoon, fresh and pickled vegetables (t‘tu), basturma, and kanachi. Lunch might include a vegetable, or meatball soup with milk such as spas. Lamb, matzoon, eggplant and bread are basic features of the Armenian cuisine, but there are many regional differences. In Soviet cookbooks the Armenian cuisine is always stated to be the oldest of Transcaucasia and one of the oldest in all of Asia. Armenian dishes make use of cracked wheat, while Georgian variations use maize. Armenian cuisine also makes use of mixed flours made from wheat, potato and maize, such as pokhindz, which produces flavors that are difficult to replicate. Archaeologists have found traces of barley, grapes, lentils, peas, plums, sesame, and wheat during excavations of the Erebuni Fortress in Yerevan.
Herbs are used copiously in Armenian cuisine, and Armenian desserts are often flavored with rose water, orange flower water and honey. Salads are also a part of the Armenian diet, along with various yogurt soups and lamb stews, which sometimes include apricots. Pomegranate juice is a popular beverage. Murat Belge has written that both Armenian and Iranian cuisines have meat and fruit dishes, where meat is cooked together with fruits like quince and plums, which is uncommon in Ottoman cuisine.
Mezes made with chickpeas, lentils, beans and eggplants play a role in Armenian cuisine, often served with traditional lavash bread. Lavash may also be used as a wrap for various combinations of fried meat, vegetables, cheese and herbs. Armenian cuisine also features filled pastry pies called byureg, various types of sausages, toasted pumpkin seeds, hazelnuts, walnuts, basturma, and dolma.
Cinnamon is a commonly used spice in Armenian cuisine; it is used in soups, desserts, fish and other foods. Salads can be served with a lemon-cinnamon dressing, alongside meat kebabs, such as lula kebab. In a survey of Armenian-American cuisine, ginger was rated an important spice.

Cooking utensils and equipments
In Armenia, the most important cooking appliance is the tonir (Armenian: Թոնիր). In ancient times, the tonir was worshiped by the Armenians as a symbol of the sun in the ground. Pagan Armenians made tonirs resembling the setting sun "going into the ground" (the Sun being the main deity). The underground tonir, made of clay and stone, is one of the first tools in Armenian cuisine as an oven and thermal treatment tool. Therefore, the tonir used to be placed in the middle of most ancient Armenian households. Armenians are said to have invented underground tonirs. It is mostly used to prepare breads such as lavash, tonir bread, matnakash, gata, bokon and more, but also grilled meats such as khorovats, as well as sometimes msho, or lula kebab and grilled vegetables such as eggplants, tomatoes, bell peppers, chili peppers and more. Skewers (շամփուր, շամփուրներ; shampur, shampurner) are also commonly used to impale and cook vegetables, or meats. The kasavan (կասավան) is used to roll out dough, while the tava (տավա) is an important cooking utensil, used to bake stuffed flatbreads such as zhingyalov hats, or to cook meats dishes such as tjvjk. Other utensils used in Armenia include the samovar (սամովար) used to prepare and serve tea, or other beverages and the srjep (սրճեփ) used to brew and serve Armenian coffee.

Sources
Armenians were affected by the ongoing Ottoman–Persian Wars (one text laments "The whole land is enslaved by the cursed Suleyman") and produced many literary works in the 16th and 17th centuries emphasizing the Christian identity of Armenians in troubled Anatolia. Food became a central theme in this body of Armenian literature. Despite prohibitions in early Armenian law codes against Armenians eating or drinking with Muslims, a "sort of blasphemous" 17th century Armenian drinking song describes a feast in Van attended by Armenian priests, laymen and Turks, with the refrain repeating "Intercede to the great barrel, bountiful is its wine." The poem contains many Armenian terms for common foods. Some of the terms found in it are: 

Halva
Porak
Paxlava
Harisa
Lahana (cabbage)
K'ufta
Xorovac
At the Mantenadaran, a museum in Armenia's capital city of Yerevan, is a manuscript written in Middle Armenian, an archaic version of the language used today. Researchers believe it presents the recipe for a cake or sweet bread: The list of ingredients seems to contain sugar, flour, and nuts. Another manuscript, probably even older, has a diagram of a cow and its cuts on one of the yellow stained pages.
An article discusses the traditional foods mentioned in Armenia's national epic Sasna Tsrer (Daredevils of Sasun), particularly focusing on the heroes’ eating habits as a lens into cultural history. Among the named dishes are t‘hal (preserved meat with tail fat), khashlama (hearty meat stew), zhazhik (strained whey cheese similar to ricotta), harisa, pilaf (made with rice, lamb, onions, pomegranate and seasoning), Saint Sargis memorial porridge (made with seven roasted and ground grains: wheat (pokhindz), chickpeas, red or white beans, barley and millet). Mixed with boiling water and topped with melted butter and pepper. Dried fruits and nuts, aghands (a sweet made by boiling flour with fruit syrup), honey, butter, lavash, wine, pomegranate wine, tea and coffee.
Ardashes H. Keoleian authored the Oriental Cookbook (1913) is a collection of recipes from the Middle East "adapted to American tastes and methods of preparation" is a mixed collection of recipes that includes some recipes from the Armenian cuisine. Armenian-American cookbook author Rose Baboian made her collection of traditional Armenian recipes accessible for young, English-speaking Armenians. Mark Zanger, a Boston-based food reporter, wrote that Baboian's book "stands out as a model of American ethnic food, because she recorded so many traditions".

Grains and legumes
Grains used in traditional Armenian cuisine included rice, bulgur, millet, semolina, wheat, barley, rye and maize. Various legumes were also consumed such as lentils, chickpeas, peas and beans.
Grains are used for a variety of purposes: traditional lavash bread is made from wheat flour and grains are also added to soups to give them a thicker consistency. Bread is an important staple of Armenian cuisine. So are soups, stews, porridges, puddings, salads, and rice dishes prepared using either grain or legumes, like pilaf (փլավ; plav), a food made out of grains (rice or bulgur), eetch (Էտչ), an Armenian bulgur-based salad, or fasulye (ֆասուլյե), an Armenian bean stew and many more examples, but this section will exclude Armenian stews, soups, salads and desserts including grains, or legumes, as these are touched upon in their respective sections in this article.

Pokhindz (Armenian: փոխինձ) is a traditional Armenian flour made from roasted wheat. The wheat is roasted, ground into flour, and has been consumed in Armenia since ancient times, according to some, even before bread. It can be eaten as is, mixed with water and salt to form a porridge, or be made into halva. Pokhindz is significant in Saint Sarkis Day traditions, especially in the dish khashil, which involves heating pokhindz with salt and water over a fire, then adding butter. Legends about Saint Sarkis Day include a story where he transforms roasted wheat flour into a blizzard to punish a cruel father. A ritual on the eve of Saint Sarkis Day involved leaving pokhindz behind a door, hoping for a sign of good luck from Saint Sarkis. On the day itself, savory and sweet pastries made with pokhindz were prepared, and foods like roasted wheat, hemp seeds, raisins, walnuts, and roasted peas were shared with children after being carried around a fire.

Kofta (կիփֆա) can be made with bulgur, finely chopped vegetables, herbs and meat. There are variations intended to be eaten cold or served hot. The most popular Armenian variety of kofta is Gavari kofta (Գավառի կիփֆա), uniquely pale and tender, for it is either steamed, or simmered rather than fried. Therefore, it has no crust. Made from finely minced meat mixed with bulgur, herbs such as parsley, coriander, and sometimes mint, and spices such as salt, black pepper, allspice and cinnamon, it focuses on a soft texture instead of a crispy exterior.

Chi kofta (չի քյուֆթե) is a type of kofta, that is a raw bulgur-based dish mixed with tomato paste, red pepper paste, pomegranate molasses, spices like urfa pepper, aleppo pepper, cumin, black pepper, garlic, salt, or allspice, and in some more traditional versions, minced meat. It is often served with lavash, kanachi, salad, and pomegranate molasses, or grape doshab.

Sini kufteh (սինի կիփֆա) is a dish similar to kibbeh, but layered and baked in a baking dish. The two outer layers are made with bulgur, minced meat, onion and spices. The inner filling includes butter, onion, minced meat, pine nuts and spices.
Harissa Armenian: հարիսա harisa, also known as կորկոտ, or ճիտապուր) is a thick porridge made of wheat and meat cooked together for a long time, originally in the tonir but nowadays over a stove.  Ardashes Hagop Keoleian called it the "national dish" of Armenians. Traditionally, harissa was prepared on feast days in communal pots. The wheat used in harissa is typically shelled (pelted) wheat, though in other regions, harissa is made with կորկոտ (korkot; ground, par-boiled shelled wheat). Harissa can be made with lamb, beef, or chicken. Spices and herbs used in the dish include salt, black pepper, garlic and bay leaves. Butter is used when making the dish and a piece of butter is often put on top of the harissa, while in other versions, melted butter spiced with aleppo pepper and other spices is used as the primary flavoring, covering the dish. The dish may be served and consumed with lavash and t‘tu on the side.

Ghapama (Armenian: ղափամա ġap’ama) is an Armenian stuffed pumpkin dish with both sweet and savory versions. The sweet version is made by hollowing out a pumpkin, or butternut squash and filling it with cooked rice, butter, honey, dried fruits like peaches, apricots, prunes, berries and raisins, nuts such as walnuts and almonds, and spices such as cinnamon, nutmeg and clove. After being stuffed the dish is baked and served. The savory version uses the same pumpkin base but fills it with rice, sautéed and regular onions, garlic, herbs such as parsley and tarragon, spices like black pepper, cumin, allspice and paprika, along with cubed mutton meat and occasionally vegetables, creating a hearty baked main dish. 

A common dish in Armenian cuisine is pilaf (Armenian: փլավ; plav). Pilaf is a seasoned rice, bulgur, or shelled wheat dish often served with meats such as lamb or beef. Some variations use a dough, or bread cover on the rice for a better taste. There are multiple types of pilaf in Armenia. One of these is Karmir Pilaf (կարմիր փիլավ), an Armenian red rice dish made with butter, rice, onions, herbs, spices (especially sumac), tomato paste and sometimes meat. The word karmir means "red" in Armenian, referring to the red color of the dish. Wedding pilaf or Chamichov pilaf (հարսանիքի փլավ; չամիչով փլավ ) is made by combining rice, dried fruits, nuts, honey, cinnamon and other spices is also a popular variety in Armenia. Another version is made by combining vermicelli or orzo with rice cooked in stock seasoned with mint, parsley and allspice. One traditional Armenian pilaf is made with the same noodle rice mixture cooked in stock with raisins, almonds and allspice. Armenian rices are discussed by Rose Baboian in her cookbook from 1964 which includes recipes for different pilafs, most rooted in her birthplace of Aintab in Turkey. Baboian recommends that the noodles be stir-fried first in chicken fat before being added to the pilaf. Another Armenian cookbook written by Vağinag Pürad recommends to render poultry fat in the oven with red pepper until the fat mixture turns a red color before using the strained fat to prepare pilaf. Pilaf made with bulgur and liver was a specialty of Zeytun.

Arishta (արիշտա) are traditional Armenian noodles made from flour, eggs, water, and salt, cut into short strips and dried. They are usually boiled, then served with melted butter. They are sometimes topped with matzoon, lecho (spicy tomato sauce), garlic, herbs, spices, meat, walnuts, or other ingredients.

Lapa is a kind of savory rice porridge or gruel eaten in Armenia, but it also is an Armenian word with several meanings. One is "watery boiled rice, thick rice soup, mush";  lepe refers to various rice dishes differing by region. Antranig Azhderian describes Armenian pilaf as a "dish resembling porridge".
An Armenian appetizer based on legumes is topik (Թոփիկ), a dish, sometimes thought of as a vegetarian meatball, consisting of a chickpea-based paste, usually mixed with potatoes or flour, surrounding a filling of onions, nuts, currants, and flavored with herbs, spices, and tahini, it is a traditional lenten dish.
In Agn (present-day Kemaliye) a thin flatbread called loshig was baked and dried. It was soaked again before being eaten. Badjoug was a pastry of fat and flour stamped with designs and sent as a wedding invitation. Glodj was unleavened bread made for Lent and klrdig was a bread made of semolina.

Herbs, spices and condiments
Armenians make extensive use of various herbs in their dishes. One porridge prepared from cereals and wild herbs is called kerchik. (The same name is used by Yazidis.) Armenians usually eat kerchik with pickled cabbage (t‘tu), whereas Yazidis eat it with knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare). In Armenia there are more than 3,600 wild plant species. Those include stinging nettle (mostly used for tea), asparagus and mallow, an herb that formed the original basis for marshmallows. The region of Western Armenia, where millions of Armenians lived prior to the Armenian genocide, has rich plant biodiversity with over 3,000 vascular plant taxa—of these almost 800 are endemic species. The inhabitants of this region often lived in inaccessible areas and were dependent on local cultivated and wild flora. Some of the most important areas of the region, in terms of plant diversity, include Harput, Lake Hazar and Munzur.

Commonly used spices include black pepper, sumac, cumin, caraway, cardamom, mahleb, clove, anise, curcuma, fennel, fenugreek, blue fenugreek, allspice, ziziphora, tumeric, saffron, paprika, cayenne, aleppo pepper, urfa pepper and cinnamon. 
Commonly used herbs to season, or flavour food include garlic, parsley, mint, coriander, dill, summer savory, thyme, tarragon, leek, chive, celery, marjoram, bay leaves, satureja, watercress and purple basil. Red pepper pulp is dried in the sun. Sprigs of terebinth are dried and infused in a mixture of water, olive oil and brine, then toasted and ground. The ground terebinth was added as a seasoning for eetch, tabouleh, and baked breads.

Armenian spice mixes
The Armenian spice mix cemen (Armenian: չաման) consists of caraway, paprika, blue fenugreek, fenugreek, black pepper, allspice, cumin, garlic, salt, and sometimes cayenne. When used as a marinade (mostly for basturma), the spice blend is added to tomato paste, parsley, crushed garlic cloves, and either olive oil or matzoon. A sweet Armenian "spice mix" called khoritz, which is used to prepare Armenian desserts like gata and nazook, is made of sugar, flour, and butter. In some variations walnuts are added.

Armenian condiments
Armenian cuisine features a large array of tomato, bell pepper and eggplant-based condiments, one Armenian sauce that is also the base of some Armenian dishes is lecho (լեչո). It is made with tomato, bell peppers, paprika, onions, garlic, black pepper, oil, parsley, bay leaves, and salt. It can be served hot.  Ikra (Իկրա) is an Armenian condiment made from roasted eggplants mashed with tomatoes, onions, lemon juice, salt, black pepper, chili, oil and herbs like parsley and garlic.

Armenian matzoon-based sauces are also popular in Armenia. Matzoon alone can also be used as a sauce, and spices and herbs are often added to it then. Red jajek (Armenian: կարմիր ջաջիկ), also called matsnaprtosh (Armenian: մածնաբրդոշ matsnaprt'oš) in Artsakh, is a matzoon sauce made with matzoon, sour cream, red beet, onion, garlic, black pepper, dill, coriander, and sometimes cucumber. Regular jajek, is made with matzoon, tarragon, mint, garlic, salt, black pepper, and sometimes cucumber.

Walnut sauce (Ընկույզի սոուս) is popular in Armenian cuisine and there are multiple variations of it, one of them is the Ashtarak sauce (Աշտարակի սոուս), which is an Armenian walnut and garlic sauce from Ashtarak, made with walnuts, garlic, vinegar or lemon juice, and salt. Other varieties combine the walnut sauce-base with other ingredients, such as bell pepper, or beans.

Some Armenian condiments are made of a tomato-based sauce, that is then combined with fruits, or only fruits with herbs and spices. One of these is plum sauce (Սալորի սոուս), a sauce made from either regular, or sour plums, herbs and spices. Other such sauces may be made with apricots, or cornelian cherries.

Armenian cuisine also features a large array of fruit syrups that are used as condiments. These are called doshab (դոշաբ). Grape doshab, mulberry doshab, carob doshab, rose hip doshab, apricot doshab and pomegranate doshab (also known as narsharab, նարշարապ; or nuri matsuk, նուռի մածուկ) are the most common variations of doshab. This condiment is also used in multiple foods, like stuffed apples, matzoon sharots, pestil and chi kofta, while it can be used as a condiment for every dish, or as a topping for desserts such as gata and as a medicine, especially for iron deficiency anemia (carob version).
Other popular condiments sometimes used in Armenian cuisine are tahini, muhammara, hummus, mutabbal, tkemali, satsebeli and most popularly, ajika.

Dairy and cheese
Typical dairy items in Armenian cuisine include matzoon, kamats matzoon, butter, cream, chortan, sar, jajek, rezhan and Armenian cheeses.

Armenian cheeses
Cheese is a staple of Armenian cuisine and traditionally was eaten daily. The process of making the Armenian cheese lori (լոռի) begins by boiling, similar to halloumi cheese. It is preserved in a brine solution. Chechil (չեչիլ) and tel panir (թել պանիր) are types of braided Armenian string cheeses akin to mozarella. Yeghegnadzor (եղեգնաձոր) is an Armenian steamed cheese named after the city of Yeghegnadzor and is made from pasteurized cows' or goats' milk that is mixed with local greens, stored in clay pots, then buried in the mountains and left to mature for at least six months before consumption. The texture is semi-soft and crumbly. Chanakh (չանախ) is an Armenian brined cheese that is soaked in pots. It is semi-hard and has a sharp, salty flavor. Mklats panir (մգլած պանիր) is an Armenian cheese, characterized by its green, or moldy appearance and a texture similar to Roquefort cheese. It is primarily produced in the Shirak Province and certain mountainous areas of Armenia. Ktor panir (կտոր պանիր) an Armenian cheese made from sheep's, cow's milk, or a mixture of both. In terms of quality, ktor panir is similar to cream cheeses like bryndza, but its production process is more primitive. Motal (մոթալ) is a cheese made with sheep milk and is flavored with wild herbs such as thyme. It is characterized by its aging process in tki/tiks (տիկ), which are leather containers made from sheep or goat hides. This method dates back 5000 years.
Armenian-American cookbook author Rose Baboian explains that Armenian cheesemaking techniques date back to an era before refrigeration was widely available so cheeses had to be preserved in brine solution.
In Musa Dagh, traditional cheese was made from curds called choukalig. Gij or kebdzoudz baneyr was salted and dried thyme combined with curds and preserved in a jug. Sourki cheese was a mixture of spices and curds shaped as a pyramid, dried, and stored in glass until it began to turn moldy. Khiroubaneyr was made by adding yogurt water to milk.

Other dairy products
Matzoon (մածուն, matsun) is an Armenian fermented milk product similar to yogurt and the most important dairy product in Armenian cuisine. Matzoon has multiple uses. Matzoon can be strained to obtain kamats matzoon (քամած մածուն), which was produced for long-term preservation by draining matzoon in cloth sacks. Afterwards it was stored in leather sacks or clay pots for a month or more depending on the degree of salting. Matzoon can also be used to make butter (կարագ), chortan, tarhana, than and other dairy products. Matzoon can also be used as a condiment, where it is combined with spices and herbs. Than (թան), similar to ayran in Turkey, is a matzoon-based drink made by mixing matzoon with water, salt, herbs like mint, tarragon, parsley, or thyme and sometimes vegetables like cucumber, or scallions. (Baboian's recipe also includes a sweet version made with sugar). This may have originated as a way of preserving yogurt by the addition of salt. Tan is the traditional Armenian name for strained yogurt. Strained yogurt that was boiled with water until completely solid is called yepadz madzoun (Եփած մածուն; cooked yogurt) and it could be stored for use in winter soups. Butter was made by beating matzoon in a churn.
Baboian gives several different recipes that can be prepared with madzoon like barley matsoon soup, jajek, and sauce served with koftas. She has also a matsoon spice cake with cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves served with coconut and walnut topping. Her recipe for fruitcake, also made with matzoon, includes dried fruits, nuts, baking spices and assorted candied fruits.
Baboian's recipes were published before yogurt was widely available in American shops, so her recipe collection included instructions for preparing yogurt at home from fresh milk when it was published. In the 1950s, Sarkis Colombosian, an Armenian who had fled Turkey in 1917, began selling yogurt from an Andover, Massachusetts based dairy farm, which he purchased during the Great Depression. The family made the matsoon themselves and also made tan. Armenian merchants in Watertown, Massachusetts began ordering yogurt, labneh and string cheese from Colombo Yogurt, and the product eventually made it on to supermarket shelves.

Sar (սար), or seruts’k (սերուցք) is a creamy dairy product made by simmering fresh buffalo, sheep, or cow milk, then cooling it slowly, during which a thick layer of cream forms on top. This cream is then skimmed off and sometimes lightly fermented. It is often served with honey, bread, or fruit, especially at breakfast or during special occasions. It is also used for desserts, like with gata (food), kadaif, or baklava, but some eat it freshly. It can also be used as a filling for pancakes.

Chortan (չորթան) is a dairy product made from strained yogurt, drained buttermilk, or drained sour milk by shaping it and letting it dry. It can be made in a variety of forms, like rolled into balls, sliced into strips, and formed into chunks. Chortan is mentioned in the 19th century Armenian epic poem Daredevils of Sassoun, said to be based on an 8th-century oral tradition.
Rezhan (ռեզհան) is a type of Armenian cream. While on its way to become butter, it is slightly under-churned, giving it a honey-like consistency.

Tarhana (Թարխանա) is a mixture of yogurt and bulgur wheat. The yogurt and bulgur are combined and left on a tray until the grains absorb the yogurt. Once the liquid is absorbed, the grain is placed in the sun to dry and then rubbed into a powder. This powder can be used to thicken soups or stews. Traditionally, it was stored in cloth bags. Three types of tarhana are known from Agn (present-day Kemaliye): the commonly known tahneh tarhana made from milled bulgur and ayran, chreh tarhana from bulgur and water (for Lent) and shira tarhana with bulgur and grape juice. According to Stanley Kerr, a staff member at the Near East Relief orphanage for Armenian children, when the massacres began during the Battle of Marash Armenians sheltering at a soap factory sustained themselves on stores that included tarhana, dried fruits and olive oil.

Fruits and other desserts
Fruit-based desserts
The main ingredients used in most Armenian sweets, especially fruit-based sweets are honey, fruits, nuts, matzoon and sesame. Both dried and fresh fruits are used. There are many fruit-based Armenian desserts including various fruit compotes. Matzoon combined with fruits, nuts, honey and doshab (դոշաբ), is a popular dessert in Armenia. Cinnamon is heavily used as spice for multiple desserts.

Sharots (Armenian: շարոց), kaghtsr sujukh (Armenian: քաղցր սուջուխ, lit. 'sweet sujukh'), or more rarely, rojig (Armenian: ռոժիգ), is made of halved walnut kernels threaded on a string that are traditionally coated in a spiced graped-based mixture called, doshab clay‘. The spices and ingredients used to make this concoction are doshab, flour, cinnamon, clove, and cardamom. Variations that substitute the grape-based mixture for another fruit, or spice-based mixture include pomegranate, apricot, cherry, peach, apple, mulberry, plum and cinnamon. Another variation of sharots, is prepared differently and is of a different and far smaller shape. It is called fruchella (Armenian: ֆրուչելլա), and is essentially round balls of fruit doshab (same mixture as used in sharots, however, the standart base is pomegranate doshab) filled with chopped and sweetened nuts. They are often sold as a sort of pralines.

Plums, pomegranates, grapes, apples, apricots, pears, peaches and watermelons are commonly used to make bastegh (Armenian: պաստեղ), also known as t‘tu lavash (Armenian: թթու լավաշ), a dried "fruit leather" that can be either served regular, or sour (t‘tu). Ttu Lavash rolls are either eaten plain, or filled with chopped nuts.
Alani (ալանի) are pitted dried fruits stuffed with ground walnuts combined with sugar. Apricots and peaches are the most commonly used to make alani, but figs (walnut stuffed figs) and other fruits are oftentimes also used. 
Armenian sweet stuffed apples (Քաղցր լցոնած խնձորներ) are made with hollowed out apples that are stuffed with a sauteed mixture of diced apples, diced pears, walnuts, hazelnuts, currants, butter, cinnamon, cloves, and star anise. After being stuffed, they are baked in the oven.

Dried fruits (Չիր; Chir) that are sometimes candied are very popular in Armenia and made with most fruits that exists in Armenia. The most popular fruits to undergo this process are apricots, peaches, plums, grapes, figs, apples, pears, cornelian cherries, mulberries and many more.

In Armenia, fresh fruits, especially berries like blackberries, raspberries, currants, and mulberries, are a common snack to go. The Armenian blackberry (մոշ; mosh) is the most popular choice. They are typically served in a cup with an additional toothpick, or wooden skewer, which is used to pick up and eat the individual fruits in the cup.

Armenian grapes (խաղող; khaghogh) have been the first fruit to be processed into derived products in Ancient Armenia , mostly for producing Armenian wine, with the oldest winery (Areni-1 winery) being located in Armenia, but grape juice is also consumed and grape doshab is used alot in multiple Armenian desserts, in fact even being the basis for multiple Armenian desserts like sharots, pastegh, shpot and more. Grapes, mostly connected to armenian wine, are widely celebrated in Armenia, like the grape blessing festival Khaghoghorhneq.
Apricots (սալոր; tsiran) hold an important place in Armenia and Its dessert culture. The apricot species prunus armeniaca is named after Armenia. The scientific name armeniaca was first used by Gaspard Bauhin in his Pinax Theatri Botanici (page 442), referring to the species as Mala armeniaca "Armenian apple". It is sometimes stated that this came from Pliny the Elder, but it was not used by Pliny. Linnaeus took up Bauhin's epithet in the first edition of his Species Plantarum in 1753.

Armenian peaches (դեղձ; deghdz) were reportedly traded westward during the era of Alexander the Great. Nowadays, smoked peaches and nuts cooked in honey is a popular dessert. One Soviet-era writer reports that Armenia's apricots, peaches, walnuts and quinces (Սերկևիլ; Serkevil) are "equal or superior to the world's best grades". Another writes "Armenian peaches are famous, and her brandies are popular throughout the world".

Armenian pomegranates (նուռ; nur) are a national symbol of Armenia since antiquity and often seen as an indigenous fruit of the Armenian highlands.  This fruit has long been - and still is omnipresent in Armenian tradition, cuisine, culture, and art.  It has been featured in artistic deeds such as the renowned film-maker Sergei Paradjanov’s film The Color of Pomegranates, and Martiros Saryan’s painting Under a Pomegranate Tree. It is not only eaten by itself, but its seeds, or pomegrante doshab are often used to garnish dishes, wheter sweet, or hearty, or becomes the main ingredient for those dishes, as in pastegh and sharots, and pomegranate wine and juice are native to Armenia.
Armenian mulberries (թութ; tut) have also been used since ancient times and can be used in multiple ways, as in gata, compotes, soaked in water, or milk as a kind of sweet soup, as a type of doshab, or even in pilafs.

Armenian pears (տանձ; tandz) are often of the species pyrus gergerana, which is endemic to Armenia. Finding trees representing rare and threatened pear species in Armenia can be compared to searching for a needle in a haystack. The country’s flora is rich in pears, including many endemic and threatened species. Pears are used in multiple desserts, such as pears poached in wine (Տանձը Գինու Մեջ), cakes, drinks and more.

Armenian plums (սալոր; salor) come in many varieties, including P.cerasifera and P.spinosa, the most common one is the cherry plum (ալոճ; aloj). Since ancient times, this fruit had multiple uses, being used to make stewed plums, jams, sauces, marinades, soups, stews, beverages like liquors, fruit leather (pastegh) and more.

Armenian raspberries (Ազնվամորի; Aznvamori) are celebrated for their flavor. Thriving in the mountainous climate, local varieties are the centerpiece of the annual Raspberry Festival held in the Ashotavan community of Sisian (Syunik Province) and in the Aparan community if the Aragatsotn province. Farmers also cultivate them commercially in the Tavush province. Raspberries are most often made into murabba (fruit preserves), but can also be made into cakes, confections, drinks and more.

Cakes
Armenia features a large selection of cakes. Many of these cakes were invented in Soviet Armenia, while others predate Soviet Armenia. Most Armenian cakes are primarily based on chocolate, nuts, coffee, honey, caramel, spices, alcohol and cream, while other cakes are primarily based on fruits.Mikado (Armenian: միկադո տորթ) is an Armenian layer cake made by stacking up layers of baked dough (the dough mainly consists of flour, cream, butter, and egg) and a buttercream that mainly consists of butter, chocolate, and condensed milk on top of each other. When finished the cake gets covered in the aforementioned buttercream, and shreds of dark chocolate, and sometimes leftover dough-crumbles.

Marlenka (Մառլենկա) is a layered Armenian honey cake, which is composed of multiple thin layers of honey-sweetened sponge cake with a filling made from buttercream, or caramel cream. It is typically topped with a dusting of crushed nuts, or cocoa-based icing. The ingredients for the dough generally include honey, flour, eggs, sugar, and butter. It resembles medovik (Մեդովիկ), another honey cake that is also popular in Armenia.

Napoleon (Նապոլեոն) is made with multiple layers of very thin dough consisting of flour, butter, eggs, and sour cream, that have a filling of sweet cream, consisting of milk, butter, eggs, sugar and in some variations cooked sweetened condensed milk (similar to dulce de leche) and armenian brandy in between them. It is often accompanied by, or even made with fruits and nuts like rapsberries, blackberries, hazelnuts, or walnuts.
Yughatert (Յուղաթերթ) is an Armenian cake made from thin layers of dough, butter and honey. The dough is mixed with eggs, milk, and butter, then rolled, brushed with butter and honey, folded six times, and baked. After baking, it is cut into squares and drizzled with warm honey butter.
Tghamardu Ideal (Տղամարդու իդեալ) is a classic layered cake featuring soft biscuit layers, chocolate frosting, and walnuts. The dough is made from sugar, eggs, honey, cognac, vanilla, flour, and baking soda, with walnuts folded into it. The batter is divided and baked in layers, then brushed with chocolate cream and filled with a buttercream made from butter, honey, condensed milk (optional), walnuts and brandy, or whisky. The cake is finished by covering it with more of the cream and topping it with dark chocolate shavings, as well as chopped walnuts.
Trchni kat tort (Թռչնի կաթ տորթ) is an Armenian birds milk cake made with either multiple layers of soft dough and a birds milk cream, or with a dough base at the bottom and a birds milk cream main part. Both versions are covered in dark chocolate glaze.
Archuk (Արջուկ) is a layered cake made with layers of soft dough consisting of eggs, butter, flour, sugar and vanilla, as well as a cream consisting of only sour cream and powdered sugar. When finished, the cake is covered in a butter-based chocolate ganache.
Sharlota tort (Շարլոտա տորթ) is a layered cake with coffee and chocolate-flavored sponge cake layers, and a coffee-based cream. The batter is made from eggs, honey, baking soda, and flour, divided into three parts, with coffee and cocoa added to two of them. The cream is made by mixing butter, condensed milk, coffee, cognac, and vanilla. The cake is assembled by layering the sponges with cream and topped with more cream and chocolate.
Armenian fruit-based cakes (Մրգային տորթեր); Multiple cakes in Armenia are made primarily using fresh fruits, dried fruits, fruit murabba, and/or fruit-based creams. They are mostly layered with layers of sponge cake, cream and murabba. For example, Tsiranov tort (Ծիրանով տորթ), also known as Karakul (Քարաքուլ), is made with apricots, Moshov tort (Մոշով տորթ) is made with blackberries, Moriov tort (Մորիով տորթ) is made with raspberries, and Deghdzov tort (Դեղձով տորթ) is made with peaches. Many other types of fruit-based cakes using different fruits exist in Armenia as well.
Armenian nut-based and spice-based cakes (Ընկույզով տորթեր; Համեմունքներով տորթեր); Multiple cakes in Armenia are made primarily using nuts and spices. These are either part of the dough, making it a dough based cake, a part of the cream inside the cake, or/and also a garnish on top of the cake. One prime example of that would be Mshkenguyzov tort (Մշկընկույզով տորթ), also known as Armenian nutmeg cake consisting of two elements, first the crumble layer similar to streusel that is used the bottom base and also as garnish, made primarily with brown sugar, butter, as well as flour and second, the batter made of milk, eggs, walnuts and nutmeg primarily, while also including cinnamon.
A hybrid between both fruit-based, as well as nut-based and spice-based cakes would be the Armenian Pear, Nutmeg and Walnut cake (Տանձով մշկընկույզով և ընկույզով տորթ), which adds caramelised pears to the nut-spice cake. Armenian-American cookbook author Rose Baboian mentions a matzoon-spice cake with cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves served with coconut and walnut topping. Her recipe for fruitcake, also made with matzoon, includes dried fruits, nuts, baking spices and assorted candied fruits.

Pastries
Armenian baklava, known in Armenian as pakhlava (Armenian: Փախլավա), is made of layers of phyllo dough, a filling of cinnamon-spiced chopped walnuts, and a syrup made from cloves, cinnamon, lemon juice, sugar and water. It is diamond-shaped and often has either one hazelnut, almond, or half a walnut placed on each piece. It is often served at special occasions like Armenian Christmas or Armenian eastern. Armenian baklava has some variations on how many phyllo layers are supposed to be used. One variation uses 40 sheets of dough to align with the 40 days of lent that Jesus spent in the desert. Another variation is similar to the Greek style of baklava, which is supposed to be made with 33 dough layers, referring to the years of Jesus's life. The city of Gavar makes its own version of baklava. It is made with 25 dough layers, has a filling of cleaned and dried chopped walnuts, sugar and a syrup that is poured over the finished baklava consisting of honey and flowers. This type of baklava used to be prepared in the then-Armenian city of Bayazet, but the people living there immigrated to Gavar and surrounding regions in 1830. Armenians say the name of the pastry, which they call paklava, derives from the Armenian word bakh (Lent) and helvah ("sweet"). 

Gata (Armenian: գաթա) is an Armenian pastry or sweet bread. There are many variations of gata in Armenia. One popular variety of it is khoritz (khoriz), a filling that consists of flour, butter and sugar. Gata can also include other fillings alongside khoritz, including nuts, (most commonly walnuts, while peanuts can also be used), dried fruits (prunes, apricots, raisins, berries), lemons, or mulberries. Some variations include placing a coin inside the dough before the gata is baked, and it is said that whoever receives the piece with the coin is to be blessed with good fortune.

Nazook (Armenian: նազուկ) is a soft and rolled Armenian pastry made from flour, butter, sugar, sour cream, yeast, vanilla extract and eggs, with a filling (khoriz) made with sugar, flour, butter, and nuts, especially walnuts. Fresh and dry fruits such as apricots, plums, peaches, berries, or raisins are often added as well to the filling. There also is a variation where lemon and cranberries are added to the filling, and a variation where cinnamon becomes the mein ingreident of the filling, essentially turning nazook into a type of cinnamon roll.

Katnashorov (կաթնաշոռով) is a soft Armenian pastry filled with sweetened and often fruit-infused quark. The dough is made of flour, yeast, milk, sugar, eggs, and butter. After being filled and baked, the pastry is dusted with powdered sugar.

Ponchik (Armenian: պոնչիկ) is a deep-fried piece of dough shaped into a flattened sphere, that turns into a puffed up sphere upon frying, and then becomes a flattened sphere after it is opened. Ponchiks are filled with custard (plain, vanilla or chocolate mostly), while nowadays, they are also filled with nutella, caramel and even jam. In Armenia, ponchik has evolved from its possibly medieval Armenian (although under different name) and Soviet roots into a beloved street and café dessert with a distinctly local character. While the Russian ponchik is often unfilled, or filled with jam and resembles a normal donut, the Armenian version is always filled with custard and puffy, collapsing after it is opened. Tutalik (Armenian: տուտալիկ) is another Armenian doughnut-like dessert similar to doughnut holes, Armenian doughnuts are sometimes also referred to as chickies.

Puddings and porridges
Anoushabur (Armenian: անուշաբուր) is a traditional Armenian sweet porridge, whose name means "sweet soup", or "sweet porridge" (from անուշ = sweet and ապուր = soup). According to tradition, it was made when Noah's family, after the ark had rested on Mount Ararat, cooked remaining grains and dried fruits into a pudding to celebrate. Armenians mostly prepare anoushabur on special occasions, like Christmas, New Year's Eve, baptisms, weddings, and thanksgiving ceremonies. Made from wheat or barley, dried fruits (often apricots, raisins, prunes), nuts (almonds, pistachios, walnuts), sugar, spices (vanilla, cinnamon), and rose water, it is simmered until tender and often garnished with pomegranate seeds, nuts and other garnishes. It is often eaten alongside khurabia.
Shpot (շփոթ), or Aghandz (աղանձ) is an Armenian pudding made by boiling fruit juice (usually grape, but sometimes mulberry) with flour and spices (cinnamon, cloves and cardamom) until thickened. When finished, it is topped with nuts (walnuts, hazelnuts, or almonds).
Khavitz (խավիծ) is a traditional Armenian sweet porridge made by slowly toasting wheat flour (pokhindz) in butter until golden brown, then cooking it with milk and honey, or sugar until it becomes a thick porridge. It is sometimes flavored with cinnamon.
Katnapour (կաթնապուր), or katnov (կաթնով) is an Armenian rice pudding made by cooking rice in sweetened milk until creamy. It is flavored, as well as dusted with cinnamon and eaten either warm or cold.

Confections and cookies
Cigarette cookies (Armenian: սիգարետ թխվածքաբլիթներ) are soft cookies that are rolled into the form of a cigarette. They are filled with either lokhum, a mixture of sugar, cardamom, and walnuts, or a combination of both. The dough mainly consists of matzoon, butter, eggs, and flour. When finished the pastry gets dusted with powdered sugar.
Dziranamahig (ծիրանամահիկ) are rolled, crescent-shaped Armenian cookies filled with a mixture of apricots, sugar, and chopped nuts, baked until golden, and dusted with powdered sugar, traditionally enjoyed around Christmas.

Popok (փոփօկ), or Popoques (փոփօքեր), are small Armenian walnut-shaped confections made with a pancake-like dough consisting of flour, eggs, sugar, butter, and milk. The dough is pressed in a special walnut-mold and then baked in that mold. When finished, they are brushed with melted chocolate from the inside and filled with caramel cream, or heated sweetened condensed milk that also resembles caramel cream.
Mrjnabuyn (մրջնաբույն) Armenian sweet made from crushed nuts and honey or condensed milk mixed with crumbs and shaped into small clusters resembling an ant's nest. It is usually covered in chocolate.

Khurabia (Ղուրաբիա) and nshablit (նաշաբլիթ), are two cookies mostly made with almonds, sugar, flour, butter and cinnamon, while nshablit also includes egg. They are mostly eaten during the Easter, Christmas and New Year celebrations.

Halva (հալվա) is a type of sweet confection made from flour, nuts, or seeds and the usually combined with sugar syrup or honey. In Armenia, it is traditionally made at home by roasting pokhindz in oil and pouring doshab (grape syrup), sugar syrup, or honey over it, then letting it cool.

Murabba (Armenian: մուրաբա) is a sweet fruit, and nut preserve. It is usually prepared with fruit or nut, sugar, and spices like cinnamon, cloves, cardamom, nutmeg, star anise. The most popular fruits and other ingredients turned into murabba are watermelon, watermelon rind, quince, pumpkin, apricot, mulberry, raspberry, pear, cherry, cornelian cherry, plum, pomegranate, and walnut. Walnut and pumpkin murabba are mostly unique to Armenia. These fruit preserves often accompany beverages, like tea.

Meats
Armenian cuisine features a variety of meat dishes. Grilled meats, dried meats, cooked meats, sausages, and leaves, vegetables, fruits, or dumplings stuffed with meat are the most common ones.

Grilled meats
Grilled meats are common in Armenia and are omnipresent at market stalls, where they are eaten as fast food, as well as at barbecues and picnics. Also, in modern times, no Armenian banquet is considered complete without an entree of grilled meat. Grilled meats vary from the simple (marinated meat on a skewer interspersed with vegetables like eggplant) to the more elaborate. The oven usually used for grilling meats in Armenia, is the tonir (Թոնիր), an underground oven used to cook meats, vegetables and breads. Certain regions in Eastern and Western Armenia developed their own variations of grilled meat. Armenians eat various meats like mutton, beef and goat, but the most popular meat in Armenian cuisine is pork. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Armenian writers in Ottoman Anatolia considered eating pork an important marker of Christian identity. An Armenian priest writing in the sixteenth century concluded, "If we didn't eat the meat of the pig, then we wouldn't be Christian." Roasted piglet, called gochi (գոճի), is a traditional holiday meal prepared for New Year's celebrations, while roasted pork chops, also known as chalagach (չալաղաչ), are a favored item for barbeques. Khorovats (խորոված) is an Armenian barbecue, that can be made with lamb, pork, beef, chicken, fish, or veal. A typical khorovats is made of marinaded chunks of meat grilled on a shampoor (skewer) inside of a tonir. When finished, it is served alongside Armenian side-dishes, like lavash, kanachi, vegetables, condiments such as jajek, matzoon, ajika, lecho and more. Potatoes, onions, tomatoes, eggplants, bell peppers, or other vegetables may be skewered alongside the meat, or on the same skewer as the meat for more flavor. Lula kebab (Armenian: լուլա քյաբաբ) is a type of kebab cooked on skewers. It is made from minced meat that is spiced with onion, tail fat, salt, black pepper, and sumac. It is usually served with lavash, kanachi, grilled onions, and pomegranates.
Msho kebab (մշո քեբաբ) is an Armenian kebab from the historical mush region, that is made from minced lamb or beef mixed with onion, garlic, black pepper, paprika, allspice and cumin. Parsley and mint are also used in its preparation. It is grilled and served with lavash, condiments, as well as grilled vegetables and kanachi herbs.
Losh kebab (լոշ քյաբաբ) — Armenian-style grilled meat patty made from ground beef or lamb, grated onion, parsley, salt, black pepper, and sometimes paprika, as well as aleppo pepper. It is shaped into round patties and grilled, often served with lavash, grilled vegetables, fresh herbs (kanachi), and matzoon.
Urfa kebab (Armenian: Կոլոլակ Ուրֆայից, lit. 'Meatballs from Urfa'), is a grilled meat-dish made of spiced minced meat interspersed with eggplant slices.
Orukh (Armenian: օրուխ) and Khanum budu (Armenian: Խանում բուդու), are two Cilician specialties. These fried patties, or kebabs are usually made with a combination of rice or bulgur, ground meat, eggs, parsley, oil, salt, and black pepper. They are cooked on skewers.
Kiufta/Kololak (Armenian: կոլոլակ kololak), meaning meatball comes in many types, such as Hayastan kiufta, Kharpert kiufta (Porov kiufta), etc.

Dried meats and sausages
In Armenian cuisine, dried meats and sausages are a traditional way of preserving and intensifying the flavor of meat, often prepared by salting and seasoning the meat with spices, these meats are served as part of meze spreads, paired with cheese, fresh herbs, condiments and lavash, or incorporated into hearty dishes to add depth and richness.Basturma (Armenian: բաստուրմա) is a salted meat that is dried, and cured, before being rubbed with a special spice-paste called cemen (չաման). Basturma is used in multiple ways. Armenian pizzerias in cities like Yerevan, Boston and Los Angeles serve basturma topped pizza. Armenian restaurants also serve basturma topped burgers, basturma can be added to salads, and basturma with omelette is also a common breakfast item in Armenia. Basturma, or a basturma omelette can also be wrapped inside a lavash, alongside other ingredients like tarragon, chechil cheese, and garlic matzoon. This way of wrapping food is common in Armenia. According to Nigol Bezjian, Armenians who survived the 1915 genocide brought basturma with them to the Middle East. Bezjian recalls that his grandmother used to prepare "basturma omelets fried in olive oil with pieces of lavash bread". He notes that Armenians from Kayseri were particularly renowned basturma producers. According to some sources, the first recorded mention of Basturma was between 95 and 45 BC in Armenia during the reign of Tigranes the Great, where it was known as aboukh (Armenian: աբուխ). The word abookhd (Classical Armenian: apukht) was already used in the Armenian translation of the Bible, in the fifth century AD, meaning "salted and dried meat". While others say that the basturma we know today was invented in the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia.

Yershig (Armenian: երշիկ yershik or սուջուխ suǰux) is a spicy beef sausage that is dried, and cured. Other than the Turkish version of sujuk, it is much denser and spicier. It is made from ground beef mixed with garlic, cumin, black pepper, and red pepper flakes. The meat is stuffed into casings and dried for several weeks. This sausage is mostly served as a cold cut, but it can also be fried.
T’hal (տհալ), or ghavurma (ղավուռմա), is a traditional Armenian preserved meat made by salting, boiling, and frying beef. The meat is then stored in clarified butter or mutton fat to keep it through the winter. Ghavurma is usually served sliced, wrapped in lavash bread with herbs and t‘tu, or as a side dish with vegetables or pilaf.
Bumbar (բումբառ) is an Armenian sausage made out of intestines filled with minced meat, onions, spices and in some variations, chickpeas, or even rice. It is often seasoned with allspice, cinnamon, black pepper and salt.

Cooked meats
In Armenian cuisine, cooked meat-dishes are part of everyday life and are served in multiple settings. Along with cooking, baking and stir frying are also common methods to prepare meats.

Khurjin (խուրջին) is an Armenian dish named after a traditional saddlebag, reflecting its distinctive pouch-like shape. Resembling an oversized khinkali when only focusing on its looks, it is made by filling a round sheet of thin dough with meat, vegetables such as onions, tomatoes and bell peppers, herbs such as garlic, parsley, mint and tarragon and spices such as black pepper, cumin, paprika, salt, cinnamon, allspice, and sometimes sumac, and then gathering and twisting the edges at the top to seal it like a bundle. The khurjin is then baked until golden, holding in all the juices. When served, it is often sliced open to reveal the steaming filling inside.
Tjvjik (տժվժիկ) is an Armenian dish which is mainly based on liver (lamb, beef, pork or chicken), which is cooked, or stir fried with onions, tomatoes, spices like garlic, black pepper, salt, and herbs like coriander, parsley, thyme and summer savory. In addition to liver it can include any other offal.
Ker u sus (Կեր ու Սուս), which means "Eat and be quiet" is prepared by sautéing beef skirt steak or, in some versions, liver, with onions and bell peppers. It is served alongside crispy potatoes, or French fries. The dish, including the crispy potatoes, is seasoned with salt, black pepper, and paprika. A salad and bread, such as matnakash, may be served alongside it.
Khokhob (խոխոբ) is an Armenian poultry dish made with either duck (most popular variation), pheasant, chicken, or turkey. The meat is cooked with tart fruits like barberries, apricots, or raisins, kanachi herbs, nuts, and warm spices. Khokhob is either served with vegetables, potatoes, or bread. A garlic, walnut and pomegranate sauce goes along with the dish.
Kyalla (քյալլա) is an Armenian dish from Gyumri, made by slow-cooking a cleaned sheep or cow head, often in a tonir, until the meat becomes tender. The cooked meat and skin are chopped, seasoned with spices, as well as herbs and placed in the head. The dish is then served with garlic, torshi and lavash.
Kchuch (Armenian: կճուճ kč̣uč̣) is an Armenian dish made of vegetables, spices, herbs (mostly garlic), tail fat, meat and/or fish. It is often described as a casserole and served in a clay pot.

Dumplings
Dumplings are a popular food in Armenia. Dumplings have been popular in Armenia and Georgia since the 13th century, where the Mongols brought them with them. Since then, multiple Armenian varieties have evolved.

Boraki (Բորակի) and Manti (մանթի) are two kinds of similar Armenian dumplings typically filled with spiced ground meat and onions, wrapped in thin dough, and often baked, or fried. Boraki and Manti are formed as small cylinders, or boats with an open top, with Manti being a lot smaller than boraki, the cylinders are sometimes lightly boiled in broth and then baked, or fried, or directly baked and fried. They usually sit in an Armenian tomatoe-sauce called lecho, which consists of bell peppers, tomatoes, onions, garlic, oil, salt, hot peppers, herbs, spices and sometimes vinegar. Boraki and Manti are served garnished with either matzoon, and spiced with paprika/aleppo pepper, sumac and/or dried mint and chopped garlic, or only with melted butter, paprika/aleppo pepper and garlic.

Lavashov rulet, or lavashov patetner (լավաշով ռուլետ; լավաշով փաթեթներ) is type of Armenian dumpling made by wrapping seasoned minced meat and sometimes vegetables in dough, or lavash bread and then baking, frying or even grilling them. The filling usually includes spiced ground lamb or beef mixed with onions, garlic, and herbs. This type of dumpling can be found in every freezing section of an Armenian supermarket.
Other types of dumplings popular in Armenia include khinkali and pelmeni.

Stuffed meat dishes
Stuffed leaves
Stuffing leaves, vegetables and meat (mostly poultry) with either rice, bulgur, meat, or other ingredients, is a common and ancient practice in Armenian cuisine. Most stuffed dishes in Armenia go by the name of tolma (տոլմա), while some stuffed dishes retained their own ancient names. The origins of dolma, as suggested by The Oxford Companion to Food, likely stem from Armenian culinary traditions before becoming integrated into Turkish cuisine. William Pokhlebkin, a specialist on culinary history and cookbook author, contends that the dish's inception traces back to Armenian culinary heritage:"From the 17th to the early 19th century, Armenia was divided between Turkey and Iran. During this period, Armenia's economy, its human and material resources declined, but its spiritual and material culture remained unchanged, and Armenian cuisine survived. On the contrary, Armenians contributed to the cuisine of the Seljuk Turks, so many truly Armenian dishes later became known in Europe through the Turks as, allegedly, Turkish cuisine (for example, dolma)."There also is a Dolma festival in Armenia that celebrates the art of tolma-making in Armenia.

There are multiple types of stuffed leaves. The most common ones are stuffed vine leaves, and stuffed sorrel. These are stuffed with a filling consisting of rice, or bulgur, minced meat, onions, herbs such as parsley, coriander, and mint and spices like black pepper and allspice. Matzoon, pomegranate syrup, lecho and other condiments may be served alongside them.
Stuffed vegetables
Stuffed vegetables are just as common in Armenian cuisine as stuffed leaves. There are multiples types of stuffed vegetables, the following are the most common ones.

Stuffed eggplant is known as either lts’onats smbuk, or smbukov dolma (Armenian: լցոնած սմբուկ; սմբուկով դոլմա) and is traditionally made with hollowed eggplant that is filled with rice, meat, herbs (tarragon, mint, parsley, coriander) onions, currants, walnuts or pinenuts and optionally raisins. While another version prepares the filling with onions, garlic, tomatoes, cinammon, allspice, cumin, turmeric, black pepper, apricots and pomegranade seeds. There also is an Armenian version making this dish using the dried skin and outer layer of an eggplant. Stuffed eggplants are often served with a tarragon vinaigrette.

There are two versions of stuffed cabbage in Armenian cuisine. The version of stuffed cabbage that includes meat in its stuffing is called msho tolma (մշո տոլմա), and is filled with ground meat, rice, onions, herbs like parsley, and spices such as black pepper and allspice. While stuffed cabbage, that does not include meat in its filling, is called pasuts tolma (պասուց տոլմա; lenten tolma), and stuffed with red beans, chickpeas, lentils, cracked wheat, tomato paste, onion, as well as multiple spices, that can also be found in the spice mix chaimen. Armenian cooks sometimes use rose hip syrup, or grape syrup to flavor stuffed cabbage rolls. As the name says, these are prepared during lent.

Stuffed onions (լցոնած սոխ) is a dish consisting of the outer layer of an onion being stuffed with minced meat, rice, chopped onion, garlic, parsley, mint, tomato paste, olive oil or butter, pine nuts, raisins or currants, salt, black pepper, allspice, cinnamon or cumin and pomegranate molasses. They usually are served in a sauce consisting of pomegranate molasses, as well as olive oil and often topped with matzoon.

Stuffed peppers (լցոնած բիբար) is a dish consisting of hollowed bell peppers filled with rice, herbs, onions, currants and optionally raisins. While the Armenian version adds tarragon, mint, walnuts and/or pinenuts to the stuffing.

Stuffed tomatoes (լցոնած լոլիկ) are tomatoes stuffed with minced meats, rice, herbs and spices.
Stuffed fruits
Stuffed fruits are one of the more uncommon variations of tolma. The following ones are the most common variations of stuffed fruit in Armenia.

Stuffed quinces (լցոնած սերկևիլ) are hollowed out quinces stuffed with minced or cubed meat, onion, rice, pine nuts or walnuts, raisins, apricots, cinnamon, grape syrup, allspice, cloves, pepper, salt and butter. This type of stuffed quinces is called Etchmiadzin Dolma.

Stuffed apples (լցոնած խնձոր) are made with apples stuffed with minced meat, parsley, mint, tarragon, black pepper, salt, raisins, apricots, walnuts, allspice, cinnamon, sumac, cumin, sumac flavored grape syrup, sautéed onions and garlic. This type of stuffed apples is also called Etchmiadzin Dolma.
Stuffed melons (Միսով Սեխի Դոլմա) are made with hollowed out melon, lamb meat or pork, onions, rice, butter, pine nuts, salt, pepper, currants, grapes and apricots.
Stuffed meats
Stuffed meat (poultry) dishes are rather rare in Armenian cuisine, but also one of the most ancient stuffed foods of Armenian cuisine.
Amich (ամիչ), also known, depending on the poultry used, as Armenian-style stuffed turkey, or Armenian-style stuffed chicken, is a dish in Armenian cuisine made from poultry, most often turkey, or chicken that is stuffed with rice and dried fruits. The name of the dish appears in manuscripts of the Armenian authors Faustus of Byzantium and Elishe from the 5th century. Historically, the dish was prepared using pheasant, rice, and dried fruits.

Doughs
Breads
Bread has been an essential part of the Armenian diet for thousands of years and remains a staple food, reflecting both cultural traditions and daily nutrition. Traditionally baked in an underground oven called the tonir, bread is one of the most important features of Armenian cuisine. Bread and cheese (Armenian: հաց ու պանիր, Armenian pronunciation: [hɑt͡sʰ u pɑˈniɾ]) are considered a national snack in Armenia, eaten throughout the day and served alongside a variety of dishes. A common Armenian expression is: "Hats u panir, gortst banir" — "Eat bread and cheese, and work." During times of scarcity, bread with cheese often served as a substitute for meat.
Matnakash (Armenian: մատնաքաշ matnak’aš) is a soft and puffy leavened bread, made of wheat flour and yeast. It is shaped into an oval loaf and then scored with a unique pattern resembling a coffee bean. The characteristic golden or golden-brown crust is achieved by coating the surface of the loaves with sweetened tea essence before baking.
Lavash (Armenian: լավաշ) is a thin flatbread usually leavened and traditionally baked in a tonir. The dough is made from flour, water, salt and sometimes a small amount of yeast. It is rolled out thin before being slapped against the hot walls of the tonir to bake quickly. Lavash can be eaten fresh, dried for later use, or used to wrap meats, vegetables, and more, making it versatile in both everyday meals and festive occasions.
Katnahunts, also known as bsatir (Armenian: կաթնահունց; բսատիր) is a traditional Armenian Easter bread made from a yeast dough of flour, sugar, milk, butter, eggs, citrus zest, and spices such as mahleb and cardamom, nutmeg, cinnamon and vanilla. The dough is kneaded, left to rise, and then shaped into braids, the form the braids are stretched into can either resemble a loaf, or a large doughnut-shape. It can be filled with dried fruits, chocolate, or nuts. Before baking, the dough is brushed with egg yolk and sprinkled with sesame.
Bokon (Armenian: բոքոն) is an Armenian bread with either a flat loaf, or rhombus shape that has a soft crumb and sometimes a hole in the center. Made from leavened dough and brushed with egg white, it is popular in Armenia.
Tarehats (Armenian: տարեհաց) is a round Armenian bread baked for New Year or Christmas. Made with wheat flour, milk, and butter, it has a hole in the center and is decorated with seeds or fruits. A coin, or bean is hidden inside for luck during the holiday cutting.
Bagharj (Armenian: բաղարջ) is a sweet ritual bread prepared for New Year's Eve, Lent, and other festive occasions. It usually has a pattern on its top and is sprinkled with sesame, black nigella seeds, or poppy seeds.
Nshkhar (Armenian: նշխար nšxar) is the communion bread used during mass (Badarak) in the Armenian Church. It always has a religious (Christian) image printed on top of it.

Dough-based dishes
Zhingyalov hats (Armenian: Ժինգյալով հաց) are flatbreads filled with different greens, which include spinach, coriander, parsley, basil (purple basil), tarragon, scallions, dill, and mint. Spices that may be added to this filled flatbread include salt, black pepper, crushed red pepper, sumac, thyme, and savory. While some also add Armenian cheeses to the flatbreads fillings. There is a variety of combinations that can be used in the bread and these greens can also be substituted for other greens. Zhingyalov hats is prepared by placing the greens and other ingredients into the flatbread. The bread is then folded into the shape of a boat. Upon which it is cooked on a tava and then eaten.

Lahmajo (Armenian: լահմաջո) is an Armenian flatbread that is topped with a mixture of minced meat, onions, garlic, tomatoes, red peppers, and parsley. It is flavored with spices such as chili, paprika, cumin, black pepper and allspice. Lahmajo is often sprinkled with lemon juice and wrapped around vegetables and herbs, including turshi, tomatoes, peppers, onions, lettuce, parsley, tarragon, and roasted eggplant.

Byoreks (Armenian: բյորեկ), are savoury pies made with phyllo pastry and stuffed with a variety of fillings. Panri borek (Armenian: պանրի բորեկ), or cheese borek, also known as khachapuri amongst many Eastern Armenians, is the most widespread variant in Armenian homes and bakeries. It is typically filled with cheeses such as lori, chechil, or motal. The filling is often mixed with herbs like tarragon or parsley and encased in folded or rolled phyllo dough. In some regions, lavash is often used instead of phyllo. This variety is often served during breakfast, or at festive gatherings. Msov borek (Armenian: մսով բորեկ, "meat borek") is a savory pastry made with seasoned ground beef or lamb, often including onions. It is usually fried and served hot. In the diaspora, triangular fried versions are especially popular and often appear on meze platters during New Year's and Easter feasts. Spanakhov borek (Armenian: սպանախով բորեկ), or spinach borek, is filled with chopped spinach and cheese, and sometimes eggs or onion. It is reminiscent of the Greek spanakopita, but reflects Armenian taste with a different seasoning and different cheese blends. It is eaten both warm and cold and is also prepared without dairy during Lent. They are thought to have entered Armenian cuisine in the Middle Ages through the Byzantine Empire, when early versions of this dish were known as plakous (savoury version). It was borrowed into Armenian as plagindi, plagunda, and pghagund. From the latter term came the later Arabic name iflaghun, which is mentioned in the medieval Arab cookbook Wusla ila al-habib as a specialty of the Cilician Armenians who settled in southern Asia Minor, where they later on had interactions with the neighboring Crusader kingdoms. Thus, the dish may have traveled to the Levant in the Middle Ages via the Armenians, many of whom migrated there following the first appearance of the Turkish tribes in medieval Anatolia.
Semsek (Armenian: սեմսեկ) is an Armenian dish made with a smooth dough that is shaped into a circle with braided edges. It is topped with a mixture of minced meat, onions, garlic, and oftentimes, vegetables such as baked tomatoes, or bell peppers. It is seasoned with paprika, cumin, black pepper, red pepper flakes, and herbs like parsley, tarragon, mint, purple basil, or coriander.
Other dough-based dishes that are not of Armenian origin, but popular in Armenia, include shawarma, khachapuri, pirozhki (mostly filled with potato and spices),and pizza (which is often topped with basturma in Armenia).

Breakfast
The regular Armenian breakfast consists of Armenian coffee, or tea, plus a spread of Armenian cheeses, fruit preserves (such as murabba), cold cuts of meats (such as basturma, or sujukh), vegetables, pickled vegetables (t’tu), multiple herbs (kanachi; tarragon, purple basil, mint, parsley, coriander, leek, dill, cress) eggs, condiments (such as matzoon, or lecho) and Armenian breads (such as lavash, or matnakash). Sometimes, tarragon-spiced eggs are also wrapped in lavash for breakfast.

Eetch (Էտչ) is a traditional Armenian bulgur-based breakfast-dish, appetizer, or salad, similar to tabbouleh. Its main ingredients include bulgur, tomatoes, and red bell peppers, which give it its vibrant red color. It also includes olive oil, onions, lemon, parsley, mint, sometimes scallions, and is seasoned with salt, black pepper, and paprika.
Loligov dzvadzekh, or Pamidorov dzvadzekh (լոլիգով ձվաձեխ; պամիդորով ձվաձեխ) is a common breakfast-dish in Armenia. Essentially a scramble with tomato as the base. This dish also includes onions, bell peppers, garlic and herbs (tarragon, purple basil, and coriander). A variation of this dish adds Armenian cheeses to the scramble. It is usually served with lavash bread and sometimes basturma. Lolikov mkhlu (Լոլիկով խլու) is an Armenian breakfast dish that combines eggs (often shirred) with slow-cooked tomatoes. The dish is made by sautéing shallots in butter, then adding cherry tomatoes and simmering them with herbs, as well as spices, such as thyme, purple basil, black pepper and salt. to create a flavorful tomato confit. Whole eggs are cracked on top of the sauce, while butter is added as well. After that, it is cooked until done. Basturma with omelette and lecho sauce is also a common breakfast item in Armenia. Basturma, or a basturma omelette can also be wrapped inside a lavash, alongside other ingredients like tarragon, chechil cheese, and garlic matzoon. This way of wrapping food is common in Armenia. According to Nigol Bezjian, Armenians who survived the 1915 genocide brought basturma with them to the Middle East. Bezjian recalls that his grandmother used to prepare "basturma omelets fried in olive oil with pieces of lavash bread".

Byureks, small cheese, meat, spinach, or herb-filled savory filo pastries are also a popular breakfast item amongst Armenians. 

Khash (խաշ), sometimes colloquially called the "Armenian hangover cure", is a basic dish of simmered cow hooves. The hooves are thoroughly cleaned, then boiled slowly for several hours, often with garlic and salt until the meat becomes tender and the collagen dissolves into a thick, clear broth. It is traditionally served plain, with salt, garlic, parsley and lavash added at the table.  Khash is often seen as food to be consumed in the morning after a party, as it is known to be consumed during battle hangovers and eaten with a "hair of the dog" vodka chaser. Khash is mentioned in 11th century medieval Armenian texts.
Diasporan Armenians vary in culinary tradition, as they often adopt local customs. Thus, Armenians in Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt may include "ful", in their breakfast.

Appetizers
Meals in Armenia usually start with a spread of appetizers (nakhutest, նախուտեստ), also known as mezes (մեզե), that are served for the table, which consists of multiple food options that can be consumed.
Basturma, sujukh, cheeses (chechil, or other armenian cheeses), herbs (tarragon, purple basil, parsley, and mint) t’tu (pickled vegetables) and armenian condiments can be served separately as mezes, but they may also be wrapped in lavash. This kind of a wrap is called a brduch (բրդուճ). It is often served as an appetizer.

T‘tu (թթու) are pickled vegetables often served as an appetizer. Vegetables that are used to be pickled include cabbage, cucumber, tomato, carrot, cauliflower, beetroot, eggplant, bell pepper, garlic, onion and turnip. These are often preserved in brine or vinegar and spiced with garlic, herbs, or chili. T‘tu may accompany other Armenian appetizers on the table, or be wrapped in lavash alongside other ingredients.

Kanachi (կանաչի) is an Armenian appetizer consisting of a combination of fresh herbs that may be accompanied by raw vegetables. Herbs such as purple basil, mint, parsley, tarragon, coriander and leek, as well as vegetables such as radishes are among the most common herbs and vegetables served.

Chi kofta (չի քյուֆթե) is a type of kofta, that is a raw bulgur-based dish mixed with tomato paste, red pepper paste, pomegranate molasses, spices like urfa pepper, aleppo pepper, cumin, black pepper, garlic, salt, or allspice, and in some more traditional versions, minced meat. It is often served with lavash, kanachi, salad, and pomegranate molasses, or grape doshab.

Ajapsandal (Աջափսանդալ) is an Armenian appetizer consisting of onion, eggplant, tomato and bell pepper that are either grilled, stewed, or fried in vegetable oil and seasoned with garlic, basil, coriander, thyme, parsley, salt, black pepper, paprika, cumin, sumac and many other seasoning. Sometimes potato, chili pepper and even carrots are added although traditional recipes do not include them. It is typically served cold.
Ailazan (այլազան) is an Armenian appetizer made from stewed vegetables. In some variations of the recipe, meat is also used. The vegetables used in this dish may include eggplant, potatoes, onions, bell peppers, green beans, tomatoes, while the herbs and spices used include purple basil, thyme, coriander, parsley, black pepper, paprika, cumin, sumac, cinnamon, and summer savory. This dish is similar to ajapsandal.

Stuffed leaves and vegetables, also known as tolma (տոլմա) can be served as appetizers. Vine leaf tolma may be served as an Appetizer, but the most popular stuffed vegetable/leaf to be served as an appetizer is stuffed cabbage. There are two versions of stuffed cabbage, the one that is stuffed with meat is called msho tolma (մշո տոլմա), and is filled with ground meat, rice, onions, herbs like parsley, and spices such as black pepper and allspice, while meatless stuffed cabbage, is called pasuts tolma (պասուց տոլմա; lenten tolma), and stuffed with red beans, chickpeas, lentils, cracked wheat, tomato paste, onion and multiple spices, that can also be found in the spice mix chaimen. Armenian cooks sometimes use rose hip syrup, or grape syrup to flavor stuffed cabbage rolls. As the name implies, these are often prepared during lent.

Voloran (վոլորան) is an Armenian appetizer consisting of grilled, as well as spiced bell peppers, and carrots being wrapped inside slices of fried eggplant. While other versions wrap walnut paste in fried eggplant slices. Both versions are usually spiced with garlic, salt and pepper, while the walnut paste used in one of the versions may include cream cheese, or matzoon. When finished, they are usually served with either pomegranate seeds, dill, and/or pomegranate molasses.

Byureks, small cheese, meat, spinach, or herb-filled savory filo pastries are also a popular appetizer in Armenia.
An Armenian appetizer sometimes thought of as a vegetarian meatball, is topik (Թոփիկ), a dish, consisting of a chickpea-based dough-paste, usually mixed with potatoes or flour, surrounding a filling of onions, nuts, currants, and flavored with herbs, spices (such as cinnamon and allspice) and tahini. It is a traditional lenten dish.

Stuffed mussels (ծովախեցգետին լցոնած) is an Armenian appetizer consisting of mussels stuffed with a spiced rice mixture. The filled consist of rice, onions, herbs, spices (such as allspice, connamon, black pepper, salt and crushed red pepper) and sometimes pine nuts, or dried currants. The stuffed mussels are steamed, or simmered with lemon juice and olive oil before being served. It is a speciality of Istanbul Armenians.
Toasted pumpkin seeds (Armenian: տուտումի գուդ, romanized: tutumi gud) and roasted sunflower seeds (Armenian: արքայածաղկի սերմ, romanized: arkayatsaghki serm) are popular snacks in Armenia, while oftentimes, an entire sunflower may be sold, so the seeds can be freshly picked out of the plant by the consumer.

In Dilijan, buttered and spiced corn on the cob (եգիպտացորենի փայտիկ) is not only the most popular snack, but also the most popular food item in the city.
Takuhi Tovmasyan discusses several Armenian mezzes in her book Sofranız Şen Olsun including stuffed fish, a dish of beans in sauce served over lavash called fasulye (ֆասուլյա), and a type of olive-oil, tomato and bean based appetizer with mussels called pilakisi (պիլակի).

Salads
Most Armenian salads (aghtsan; աղցան) combine a grain, or legume with fresh vegetables such as tomatoes, onions, bell peppers, eggplants and olives, while fresh herbs, such as parsley, coriander, tarragon, purple basil and dill are also commonly used. In some salads, fruits, or nuts (mostly walnuts) may also play a significant role. Foreign ingredients such as mayonnaise are only used in Western or Russian-inspired salads (such as Olivier salad). Examples of actual Armenian salads include:

Eetch (Էտչ) is a traditional Armenian bulgur-based salad, similar to tabbouleh. Its main ingredients include bulgur, tomatoes, and red bell peppers, which give it its vibrant red color. It also includes olive oil, onions, lemon, parsley, mint, sometimes scallions, and is seasoned with salt, black pepper, and paprika.
Mshosh (մշոշ) is an Armenian salad made with lentils, dried or fresh apricots, cooked onions and walnuts. The lentils are cooked until soft, then mixed with the chopped dried, or fresh apricots, chopped walnuts and cooked onions. Olive oil, lemon juice, herbs such as parsley and tarragon are added, along with spices such as salt, black pepper, paprika and cumin. The dish is typically served at room temperature.

Bazrkani (բազմակնի) is an Armenian olive salad, prepared with olives, red onions, chillie peppers and cherry tomatoes. The dressing, made from tomato paste, pomegranate molasses, olive oil, bay leaves, black pepper, paprika, cumin, and thyme, is mixed into the chopped salad ingredients. After briefly resting to allow the flavors to combine, the salad is finished with chopped parsley, chopped walnuts, and optionally salt before serving.
Aveluk salad (ավելուկ սալաթ) is an Armenian salad made from dried wild sorrel (aveluk) that is soaked, boiled, and chopped. It is then mixed with onions, garlic, crushed walnuts, olive oil, lemon juice, or pomegranate molasses, herbs, and pomegranate seeds.

Khorovats salad (խորովածի սալաթ) is an Armenian grilled vegetable salad served as a side to grilled meats such as khorovats, or lula kebab. It consists of aubergines, bell peppers, tomatoes and onions that have been grilled inside a tonir. The dressing consists of lemon juice, olive oil, salt, paprika, black pepper and parsley.
In addition to these traditional salads, international salads such as Greek salad, Caesar salad, and pkhali are also commonly enjoyed in Armenia today.

Soups and stews
Soups (ապուր; apur) and stews (կուժա; kuzha) are traditional elements of Armenian cuisine, often prepared with locally sourced ingredients such as lamb, lentils, eggplant, tomatoes and matzoon. These dishes have been commonly consumed since antiquity, reflecting the agricultural practices and seasonal availability of produce in the region. Preparation methods vary by region and occasion, with some recipes passed down through generations, highlighting the cultural significance of communal meals in Armenian society.

Spas (Armenian: Սպաս), which is a matzoon-based soup, and a traditional dish in Armenia. Besides matzoon, the main ingredient are herbs, and hulled wheat berries (i.e. with husks removed). There are many varieties of Spas, like using rice, barley, or bulgur instead of wheat berries. Butter, onions and meatballs often get added for a richer taste.

Kyalagyosh (Armenian: քյալագյոշ) is a matzoon-based soup served over toasted pieces of lavash. The soup is prepared with eggs, flour, onions, walnuts, matzoon, chicken bouillon, sour cream, thyme, mint, coriander and onions. While other versions also add lentils, or meat to the soup.

Khash (խաշ), sometimes colloquially called the "Armenian hangover cure", is a basic dish of simmered cow hooves. The hooves are thoroughly cleaned, then boiled slowly for several hours, often with garlic and salt until the meat becomes tender and the collagen dissolves into a thick, clear broth. It is traditionally served plain, with salt, garlic, parsley and lavash added at the table. Khash is often seen as food to be consumed in the morning after a party, as it is known to be consumed during battle hangovers and eaten with a "hair of the dog" vodka chaser. Khash is mentioned in 11th century medieval Armenian texts.
Panrkhash (Armenian: պանրխաշ) is an Armenian stew from Gyumri that consists of lavash bread, butter, cheese (chechil or tel panir), onions, and boiling water. When finished, the stew is garnished with caramelized and fried onions. 

Khashlama (Armenian: Խաշլամա) is a traditional Armenian vegetable and lamb stew. The main ingredients include lamb, onions, potatoes, carrots, tomatoes, bell peppers and garlic. Herbs and spices used in this stew include parsley, dill, tarragon, thyme, black pepper and salt. It is usually cooked over a tonir and when finished, garnished with crushed red pepper and eaten together with lavash. 
Mantapur (Armenian: մանթապուր mantʿapur) is a soup typically made with matzoon, beaten eggs, flour, garlic and meat broth, to which manti, either raw or pre-cooked, are added. Wheat berries are rarely added to the soup. This soup is often seasoned with mint, parsley, tarragon, black pepper and consumed hot. There is also another version of mantapur, which consists of manti simmered in a clear broth, and then eaten with a dollop of matzoon, or sour cream and parsley on top.

Putuk (Armenian: պուտուկ putuk) is a soup made with broth, mutton, and pre-soaked chickpeas in clay pots. During the cooking of the mutton and chickpeas, other ingredients such as potatoes, onions, dried alycha, and saffron are added. Slow cooking, which often lasts several hours, allows the flavors to fuse. The soup is served in the clay pot it was cooked in and is often accompanied by an Armenian leavened bread called matnakash.

Bozbash (Armenian: բոզբաշ bozbaš) – a mutton or lamb soup that exists in several regional varieties with the addition of different vegetables. It usually is made with lamb, chickpeas, onions, potatoes, tomatoes, bell peppers, garlic, parsley, bay leaves, tumeric and black pepper, but there also is a special kind of bozbash served in Armenia. It is mamed Shoushin bozbash (Armenian: շուշին բոզբաշ), and is made from lamb, onion, tomato, quince, apple, plums, spices and mint. This variation of bozbash is "practically unknown outside of Armenia".

Gomgush (Armenian: ղամղուշ) is an Armenian banquet stew typically cooked over a tonir and mostly made of either lamb or sevan trout, pumpkin or summer squash, tomatoes, matzoon, garlic, pepper paste and mint, while other versions may also include chickpeas, lemon juice, dill, or prunes. 

Ajapsandal (Armenian: Աջափսանդալ) is an Armenian appetizer consisting of onion, eggplant, tomato and bell pepper that are either grilled, stewed, or fried in butter, or vegetable oil and seasoned with garlic, basil, coriander, thyme, parsley, salt, black pepper, paprika, cumin, sumac and many other seasoning. Sometimes potato, chili pepper and even carrots are added although traditional recipes do not include them. It can be served either cold, or warm, depending on in which course it is served.

Ailazan (Armenian: այլազան) is an Armenian stew made from stewed vegetables. In some variations of the recipe, meat is also used. The vegetables used in this dish may include eggplant, potatoes, onions, bell peppers, green beans, tomatoes, while the herbs and spices used include purple basil, thyme, coriander, parsley, black pepper, paprika, cumin, sumac, cinnamon, and summer savory. This dish is similar to ajapsandal.
Arganak (Armenian: արգանակ arganak) – soup that is based on seasoned meatballs, and onions, which are cooked in chicken broth, and flavored with lemon juice, egg yolks and parsley.
Karshm (Armenian: կարշմ) is a local soup made in the town of Vaik in the Vayots Dzor Province. This is a walnut-based soup with either red beans, green beans or chickpeas, mutton and spices. It is garnished with red pepper and garlic.
Nraneh (Armenian: ռնանե) is a soup made with lamb, pomegranate juice or pomegranate molasses, beetroot, coriander, tarragon, black pepper and salt. While rice, peas, or sorrel can also be added in some variations.
Aveluk soup (Armenian: ավելուկի ապուր) is a soup made of aveluk (sorrel), onion, walnuts, potatoes, plums, garlic, oil or butter, salt, black pepper, lemon juice or vinegar, dried herbs like thyme, as well as mint and sometimes bulgur, chickpeas, or rice may be added as well. When finished, it is often garnished with pomegranate seeds.
Vospapour (Armenian: ոսպապուր) – lentil soup made with brown lentils cooked in broth together with chickpeas, carrots, celery, coarse bulgur, and puréed apricot, or sometimes, other fruits. It is flavoured with fried onions, mint, parsley, and cumin. Variations also include spices and ingredients like cayenne pepper, cinnamon, tomatoes, eggplants, spinach, and ground walnuts.
Kololik (Armenian: կոլոլիկ) – is a traditional meatball soup. The meatballs are made with a combination of ground lamb, onions, parsley, black pepper, salt and other seasonings. The soup is prepared with a combination of onions, beaten eggs, rice, beef stock, tarragon, basil, and potatoes.
Kololak (Armenian: կոլոլակ, or կոլոլակով ապոր Kololakov apoor) – is a soup made with meatballs (consisting of ground meat, rice, onion, egg, and black pepper) and vegetables like potatoes, carrots, and onions, cooked in a broth made out of water, butter, green chilli, bay leaves, basil, dill, coriander, black pepper, cumin, and a sauce called lecho (See: Armenian condiments).
Fasulye (Armenian: ֆասուլյե), and Ganach lupia (Armenian: գանչ լուպիա) are Armenian stews made with green beans, tomatoes, and onions. They can include lamb or beef and are seasoned with garlic, allspice, salt, and pepper. The ingredients are cooked in a tomato-based sauce, creating a hearty bean stew.
Gouvaj (Armenian: գուջավ) is an Armenian dish of slowly roasted lamb or beef, often using the shoulder, combined with vegetables. The vegetables used in this stew typically include bell peppers, onions, tomatoes. While beans, zucchinis, and okra can also be added. Garlic, parsley, salt, tomato paste and spices such as black pepper, allspice and others are used to season the stew. The meat and vegetables are baked together until the lamb, or beef becomes tender and begins to fall apart. The pot of often sealed with dough that develops into a flatbread-covering that seals the juices and smoke inside.
Sharovi (Armenian: շարովի) is a traditional Armenian summer vegetable stew prepared with layers of potatoes, eggplant, zucchini, green beans, bell peppers, and tomatoes. It is seasoned with onion, garlic, parsley, cilantro, dill, basil, salt, and black pepper, and was traditionally cooked in a tonir or hearth, though today it is often made in ovens.
Sokonov (Armenian: սոկոնով, or սոկոնով ապոր, romanized: Sokonov apoor) – is a soup made with mushrooms, onions, egg, coriander, butter, and black pepper. When the soup is finished garlic-matzoon, parsley, and red pepper get put onto the soup for additional flavor.
T'ghit (Armenian: թղիթ) is made from pastegh (thin rolled-up sheets of sour plum purée), which are cut into small pieces and boiled in water. Fried onions are added and the mixture is cooked into a purée. After that, pieces of lavash are placed on top. It is eaten hot, and lavash is used to scoop up the mixture by hand.
Snkapur (Armenian: սնկապուր snkapur) – is a soup made with sautéed mushrooms, onions, carrots, potatoes, garlic, cream, and black pepper. It is made by puréeing all ingredients together.
Blghourapour (Armenian: բլղուրապուր blġurapur) – a sweet soup made of hulled wheat that is cooked in grape juice. It can be served hot, and cold.
Brndzapour (Armenian: բրնձապուր brndzapur) – rice and potato soup cooked in broth, and garnished with coriander.
Dzavarapour (Armenian: ձավարապուր dzavarapur) – soup made from hulled wheat, potatoes, and tomato purée. Egg yolks are stirred into the soup before serving.
Flol – (Armenian: ֆլօլ) beef soup made with millet, spinach leaves and sometimes also cherry-sized dumplings, that are cooked in broth.
Katnapur (Armenian: կաթնապուր kat’napur), or Katnov (Armenian: կաթնով kat’nov) – a rice pudding, sweetened with sugar and spiced with cinnamon.
Krchik (Armenian: Քրճիկ kṙčik) – soup made from pickled cabbage, onions, potatoes, tomato purée, cracked wheat, potatoes, coriander, parsley, butter, black pepper, and salt.
Sarnapour (Armenian: սառնապուր saṙnapur) – is a soup made with peas, rice, beets and matzoon.
Tarkhana (Armenian: թարխանա t’arxana) – flour and matzoon soup
Matsnaprtosh (Armenian: մածնաբրդոշ matsnaprt'oš) – this soup is made with sour clotted milk diluted with cold water, with less vegetation than okroshka itself. Matsnaprtosh is served cold as a refreshment and supposedly normalizes blood pressure.
The "everyday" Armenian stew is the Dzash (Ճաշ). This is a brothy stew consisting of meat (or a legume, in the meatless version), vegetables, and spices. The dzhash was typically cooked in the tonir. It is generally served alongside a pilaf of rice, or bulgur. It is sometimes accompanied by bread, torshi or fresh vegetables and herbs. A specific variety of dzhash is the porani (պորանի), a stew made with matzoon. Examples of dzhash are:
Meat and green beans or green peas (with tomato sauce, garlic, and mint or dill)
Meat and summer squash (or zucchini). It is characterized by the liberal use of dried mint, tomatoes, and lemon juice.
Meat and pumpkin. This is a wedding stew made with meat, chickpeas, pumpkin, tomato, pepper, and spices.
Meat and leeks in a matsoon-based soup.
Urfa-style porani, made with small meatballs, chickpeas, chard, and desert truffles.

Seafood
Nowadays, Armenia is a land-locked country, whose seafood comes from lakes like the Sevan, but in ancient and medieval times, Armenian empires occasionally had access to the black sea, the mediterranean sea and large lakes such as lake van, lake urmia and the caspian sea. Armenian cuisine includes a large number of seafood dishes (ծովամթերքի ուտեստներ). Typically, seafood is either grilled, fried, stewed, boiled, or poached, while seafood like fish, or mussels may also be stuffed before being cooked. Fish may also have been used to stuff vegetables in ancient times, though that is not common anymore.

Fish-based dishes
Ishkhan, Koghak, Karmrakhayt, Sig and Sturjan (իշխան; կողակ; կարմրախայտ; սիգ; ստորջան) are five fish that are either native to the Armenian lake of Sevan (like the Ishkan and Koghak), native to armenian rivers (like the Karmrakhayt, or Sturjan), or have been introduced to Armenia from somewhere else (like the Sig). They are prepared in various ways. One of them is cooking them in oil, garlic and tarragon, while another way is cooking them in wine, where green onions, tarragon, garlic and spices like black pepper, or allspice are also added to the wine sauce. However, there are many more ways to prepare them.
Fish khorovats (ձկնով խորոված) is a type of khorovats where the aforementioned fish are rubbed with garlic, salt and black pepper, before being greased with butter and grilled on skewers inside a tonir. It may also be grilled after being marinated in a red pepper paste.
Fish kebab (ձկն քյաբաբh) is an Armenian kebab made out of the minced meat of fish, mostly the sig fish (while other fish found in the sevan lake also may be used), tarragon, black pepper, allspice and paprika. It is often served with lavash, vegetables and herbs like onions, parsley, purple basil and tarragon, and condiments like pomegranate doshab.
Stuffed ishkhan / Stuffed mackerel (լցոնած իշխան ; լցոնած սկումբրիա) is an Armenian dish consisting of either sevan trout (ishkhan), or mackerel to be stuffed with apricots, prunes, damsons, almonds, hazelnuts, pine nuts, walnuts, cinnamon, cloves, allspice, ginger, fresh herbs (tarragon and thyme), and lemon juice. There are many variations to what the stuffing may include.
Fish tolma (ձկի տոլմա) consists of minced fish that is combined with boiled buckwheat, or bulgur, black pepper, allspice, mint and onions.
Fish kutap (ձկի կուտապ) is fish which has been gutted and stuffed with butter, boiled rice, dried fruits, crushed ginger, tarragon, parsley, paprika, allspice and black pepper. The top of the fish is rubbed with salt and then baked.
A variation of khashlama called Sevan khashlama (սևան խաշլամա), made by stewing either of these fish with potatoes, tomatoes, garlic, onions, bell peppers, tarragon, parsley, black pepper, allspice, paprika, caraway and other ingredients is also popular in Armenia.
Fish kchuch (ձկի խուճ) is a dish prepared in a clay pot called khuch. The pot is greased with butter and filled with layers of chopped onions, bell peppers, tomatoes and chopped fish. Vegetables are placed on top of the fish and seasoned with salt, pepper, paprika, allspice and tarragon. A small amount of wine is poured on top before the dish is baked.
Sig with vegetables (սիգ բանջարեղենով). Sig, a whitefish is cut into small pieces and boiled in salted water while onions, carrots, garlic and tomatoes are fried separately. In a saucepan flour is fried until golden brown and combined with the fish broth and fried vegetables. As soon as it has boiled it is removed from the stove. Whitefish with vegetables is supposed to be served in a deep dish by spreading the fish on the bottom of the plate and pouring the broth over it.
Ishkhan hashats (իշխան խաշած) is stewed / boiled ishkhan which has been cleaned of the entrails, cut into small pieces and soaked in water with tarragon for a duration. After being removed from the water and before being served, the fish is supposed be covered with a damp cloth and set in a cool place. It is served usually served with potatoes, tt‘u and a light sauce, like a wine sauce.
Fish balls, mostly made from the ishkhan and called Ishkhana (իշխանա) are made from minced fish, eggs and spices, while they are often served in a sort of gravy consisting of onions, tomatoes, garlic, tarragon, black pepper and flour.
Fish in lavash (ձուկ լավաշով) is a simple food found in many regions of Armenia, ishkan is mostly used for this dish, that is made by cutting the fish used into small pieces before stewing, or cooking it with tarragon, garlic, lemon, balck pepper, allspice and paprika, before being wrapped in lavash.
Caviar / Dzkan dzvik (կավիար; ձկան ձվիկ) are fish eggs harvested from the sturjan. They are a type of black caviar and in Armenia, they are either eaten by themselves, with fish, mussels, salads, lavash, matzoon, or in other ways. The originally Armenian caviar company Petrossian still holds a high status in Europe.
Fish that has been stewed, or cooked with bay leaves, black pepper, paprika, allspice, tarragon, parsley, coriander, vegetables, or sometimes fruits, may be served with baked potatoes and t‘tu.
Most fish in Armenia have garlic, and lemon juice either added to them, or are garnished with them, while fish in armenia are often served in walnut sauce, or pomegranate doshab.

Other seafood dishes
Armenians also use other species to prepare seafood, like crayfish (ռակ), or mussels (միդիա). Fried mussels (վառած միդիա) and fried crayfish (վառած ռակ) are made by frying mussels, or crayfish before serving them with garlic matzoon, a garlic-tomato sauce, or a herbsauce made of butter, black pepper, paprika, allspice, tarragon and parsley. However, there are also other ways to prepare them.
Stuffed mussels (ծովախեցգետին լցոնած) is a dish consisting of mussels stuffed with a spiced rice mixture. The filled consist of rice, onions, herbs, spices (such as allspice, cinnamon, black pepper, salt and crushed red pepper) and sometimes pine nuts, or dried currants. The stuffed mussels are steamed, or simmered with lemon juice and olive oil before being served. Fried mussels by themselves are also a popular food. It is a speciality of Western Armenians, specifically Istanbul Armenians and Hemshins.
Crayfish kebab (ռակ  քյաբաբ) is a kebab made out of minced crayfish meat, onions, garlic, black pepper, paprika, allspice and sumac. When finished, they are served with kanachi herbs, onions and pomegranate doshab.

Variety of aquatic life in Armenia
There are several varieties of hydrobionts in Armenia:

Ishkhan (Armenian: իշխան išxan) – an endemic fish species of Lake Sevan in Armenia. It is a salmonid fish related to the brown trout.
Sig (Armenian: սիգ sig) – a common whitefish from Lake Sevan, native to northern Russian lakes.
Karmrakhayt, also known as Alabalagh (Armenian: կարմրախայտ karmrakhayt) – a river trout, also produced in high-altitude artificial lakes (e.g., the Mantash Reservoir in Shirak Province).
Koghak (Armenian: կողակ koġak) – an endemic Lake Sevan fish of the carp family, also called Sevan khramulya.
Sturjan (Armenian: ստորջան sturjan) – is a relatively small species of sturgeon from Eurasia native to rivers that flow into the Black Sea, Azov Sea, and Caspian Sea.
Khetsgetin (Armenian: խեցգետին xecʻgetin) – a freshwater crayfish found in rivers and lakes across Armenia, especially in cool, clean waters.
Midia (Armenian: միդիա midia) – freshwater mussels, mostly from Lake Sevan.
There are many more hydrobionts that can be found in Armenia, but these are the most common ones.

Ritual foods
Ritual foods of the Armenian Apostolic Church, is food consumed as part of ceremonies, rituals, religious observances, and the like.

Nshkhar (Armenian: նշխար nšxar) is the holy communion bread used during mass (badarak) in the Armenian Church. It always has a Christian image printed atop it.
Mas (Armenian: մաս mas) – literally means "piece"; a piece of leftover bread from the making of nshkhar, given to worshippers after church service.
Matagh (Armenian: մատաղ mataġ) – sacrificial meat; can be of any animal such as goat, lamb, or even bird.

Beverages
Beverages (խմիչք; khmich’k), especially alcoholic beverages, herbal infusions, fruit-based beverages and matzoon-based beverages have been popular in Armenia since antiquity, with the earliest remains of a winery (Areni-1 winery) from 6100 years ago being located in Armenia. The alcoholic beverages Armenians used to consume most would include wine (գինի; gini), which has been constantly present since the earliest records, and beer (գարեջուր; garejur), which was first mentioned as a beverage that Armenians drink in 500BC by Xenophon. The matenadaran has collected ancient recipes for herbal infusions, fruit infusions, teas, distillations and elixirs from ancient and medieval Armenia, which were usually prepared and stored by Armenian monasteries. The most known ones are Elixir Arates (դեղահյութ արատես), a distilled, as well as aged beverage made from hawthorn and ziziphora; the flower tea kenarar (կենարար), made from cephalaria, bay leaf, Lotus eremiticus, ziziphora, as well as honey; and the Royal Elixir (թագավորական դեղահյութ), a distilled fruit, herb and flower elixir made from hawthorn, cochineal, mastic, Acorus calamus, nardostachys, cephalaria, nutmeg, piper cubeba, Crocus sativus, iridaceae, Myrtus communis, ziziphora and honey.

Teas and infusions
Herbal infusions, fruit infusions and teas, in Armenia, are all commonly referred to as tey (թեյ) and as stated earlier, have been known and produced in Armenia for thousands of years, the following section will be about the most popular herbs and fruits used to produce the aforementioned products.

Coffee
Armenian coffee (Armenian: սուրճ, romanized: surč) is a type of strong coffee popular in Armenia, which is made by finely grinding coffee beans, mixing them with cold water, cardamom and sometimes sugar in a srjeb (սրճեփ; copper pot), slowly bringing it to a frothy boil over low heat, before it is poured into small cups and served hot. It is similar to Turkish coffee and Arabic coffee; the main difference between Armenian coffee and Turkish or Arabic coffee is that Armenians use a slightly different technique and because cardamom is added to Armenian coffee. Armenians introduced the coffee to Corfu when they settled the island, as Corfu did not have an established coffee culture before the Armenians; therefore, on Corfu, it is known as "eastern coffee" due to its eastern origin. According to The Reuben Percy Anecdotes, compiled by journalist Thomas Byerley, an Armenian opened a coffee shop in Europe in 1674, at a time when coffee was first becoming fashionable in the West. In Armenia it is locally either called հայկական սուրճ, haykakan surč, 'Armenian coffee', or սեւ սուրճ, sev surč, 'black coffee', referring to the traditional preparation done without milk or creamer. If unsweetened it is called bitter (դառը; daruh), but more commonly it is brewed with a little sugar.

Kefir (Armenian: կեֆիր) – fermented milk drink
Tan (Armenian: թան) – matzoon drink (still or carbonated), often flavored with herbs (like parsely and mint) and vegetables like cucumber.
Herbal tea (Armenian: թեյ) – is a type of tea drunk in Armenia. The most popular flavors are ziziphora, mint, chamomile, and thyme.
Jermuk (Armenian: Ջերմուկ J̌ermuk) – a brand of mineral water from the Jermuk area.
Hayk, Sari – a brand of bottled mountain spring water from the Jermuk area (in Armenian Hayk stands for Armenian and Sari for from the mountains).
Tarkhun soda (Armenian: թարխուն t’arxun) – tarragon-flavored soda.
Pomegranate juice (Armenian: Նռան հյութ) – is a popular beverage in Armenia and can be found in almost all Armenian cities and villages.

Alcoholic drinks
Beer
Armenian-produced beer (Armenian: գարեջուր gareǰur) is considered to be one of the favorite drinks of Armenian men. The beer industry is developing barley malt and producing beer from it. The preparation of beer in Armenia was known from ancient times. According to the Greek historian Xenophon the manufacture of beer existed in Armenia when he first arrived there(in the 5–4th century BC). Armenians used beer grains for brewing (barley, millet, hops).
In 1913 there were three beer factories that produced 54,000 deciliters of beer. From 1952 to 1978, new factories in Yerevan, Goris, Alaverdi, Abovyan were built while existing factories were expanded and improved upon. For providing raw materials for beer production in Gyumri, a large malt plant was launched based in the production of barley malt of Shirak valley farms (with the capacity of 10,000 tons of production). In 1985, 6,000,000 deciliters of beer were produced.
Popular brands

Kotayk Brewery
Kilikia
Erebuni (produced by Kotayk Brewery)
Gyumri
Aleksandrapol Archived 1 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine
Dargett

Brandy
Armenian brandy (Armenian: կոնյակ konyak), known locally as konyak is perhaps Armenia's most popular exported alcoholic drink. It has a long history of production. Armenian brandy made by Yerevan Wine & Brandy Factory was said to be the favorite drink of British statesman Winston Churchill. It was the favorite alcoholic drink of Joseph Stalin, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill at the Yalta Conference at 1945.
The history of Armenian brandy (Ararat Brandy) begins in 1877, in the winery of Armenian merchant N. Tairov (Yerevan). By 1890–1900 Yerevan was becoming a center for the production of brandy, numbering a number of factories owned by Gyozalov (1892), Saradjev (1894), Ter-Mkrtchian (1899), and others. In 1899, N. Tairov sold his factory to Nikolay Shustov's well-known brand in Russia. In 1914, there were 15 factories in the province of Yerevan (the largest the one now owned by Shustov) produced 210,010 deciliters of brandy. In 1921, the Soviet state took over Shustov's factory, and it was renamed to "Ararat". This became the main factory for wine manufacturing.
Despite the fact that only brandies produced in the Cognac region of France have the legal permission to be called "cognac" according to Western trade rules, Armenian brandy is called cognac inside Armenia. Yerevan Brandy Factory is now negotiating to obtain an official privilege to market its brandy as cognac.
Armenian brandy is categorized by its age and method of aging. The rated stars indicate the age of brandy since its fermentation starting from three stars. The most expensive cognacs have passed additional vintage for more than six years and have special names. The brandy is aged in oak barrels and is made from selected local white grapes grown in the Ararat Valley which is giving it a shade of caramel brown.
Popular Brands

Ararat
Noy
Ararat Erebuni
Ararat Taste, collection Apricot, Cherry, Coffee and Honey.
Ararat Nairi
Ararat Akhtamar
Ararat Otborny
Ararat Ani
Ararat Vaspurakan
Ararat Dvin

Oghi
Oghi (Armenian: օղի òġi) – an Armenian alcoholic beverage usually distilled from fruit; also called aragh. Artsakh is a well-known brand name of Armenian mulberry vodka (tuti oghi) produced in Nagorno-Karabakh from local fruit. In the Armenian Diaspora, where fruit vodka is not distilled, oghi refers to the aniseed-flavored distilled alcoholic drink called arak.

Tuti oghi (Armenian: թթի օղի t’t’i òġi) - mulberry oghi. It is the most popular variation of this alcoholic drink
Honi oghi – from hon, a small red berry (cornelian cherry)
Tsirani oghi – from apricots
Tandzi oghi – from pears
Khaghoghi oghi – from grapes
Salori oghi – from plums
Moshi oghi – from blackberry
Tzi oghi – from figs
Khundzori oghi – from apples

Wine
The alcoholic drink with the longest history in Armenia is wine. The oldest known winery in the world was discovered in Armenia. Historically, wineries in Armenia were concentrated along the Ararat valley. Of particular note was the district of Koghtn (Գողթն, current Nakhichevan area). Today, Armenian wineries are concentrated in the Areni region (district of Vayots Dzor).
Armenian wine is mostly made from local varietals, such as Areni, Lalvari, Kakhet, etc., though some wineries mix in better known European varietals such as Chardonnay and Cabernet. Winemaking took a downward plunge in the years following the collapse of the Soviet Union, but is undergoing a revival, with the addition of world-class labels such as Zorah Wines. A yearly wine festival, held in Areni, is popular with the locals and features wines from official wineries as well as homemade hooch of varying quality. Armenian wines are predominantly red and are sweet, semi-sweet (Vernashen, Ijevan), or dry (Areni).
Armenian Highland engaged in winemaking since ancient times. It has achieved considerable development of Urartu times (9th – 6th centuries. BC). During excavations in the castle of Teyshebaini around traces of 480 different types of grapes were found, and in Toprakkale, Manazkert, Red Hill and Ererbunium 200 pots.
The evidences of high-level and large-scale wine production in Armenia are as foreign (Herodotus, Strabo, Xenophon and others) and Armenian historians of the 5th–18th centuries, as well as sculptures of architectural monuments and protocols. Armenia's current area began wine production in the 2nd half of the 19th century. At the end of the 19th century, next to the small businesses in Yerevan, Ghamarlu (Artashat), Ashtarak, Echmiadzin (Vagharshapat ), there were 4 mill.
In addition to grapes, wines have been made with other fruit, notably pomegranate (Armenian: նռան գինի nran kini), apricot, quince, etc. In some cases, these fruit wines are fortified.

Mineral waters
Armenia has rich reserves of mineral water. After the establishment of the Soviet Union the study and development of multilateral disciplines in these waters began. First industrial bottling was organized in Arzni in 1927. In 1949, Dilijan and Jermuk mineral water factories were put into operation. In 1960–1980 "Sevan", "Hankavan", "Lichk", "Bjni", "Lori", "Arpi", "Ararat", mineral water bottling plants and factories were launched, which are involved in the production unit "mineral water of Armenia". ASSR in 1985 produced 295 million bottles of mineral water.

See also
Culture of Armenia
List of dishes from the Caucasus

References
Bibliography
Bozoyan, Azat A. (2008). "Armenian Political Revival in Cilicia". In Hovannisian, Richard G.; Payaslian, Simon (eds.). Armenian Cilicia. UCLA Armenian History and Culture Series. Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publishers. pp. 67–78. ISBN 978-1568591544.
Davidson, Alan (2014) [1999]. The Oxford Companion to Food (Third ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19967-733-7.
Gallani, Barbara (15 May 2015). Dumplings: A Global History. Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-78023-433-5.
Perry, Charles (2001). "Studies in Arabic Manuscripts". In Rodinson, Maxime; Arberry, Arthur John (eds.). Medieval Arab Cookery. Totnes: Prospect Books. pp. 91–163. ISBN 0907325912.
Uvezian, Sonia (1996). Cuisine of Armenia. Hippocrene Cookbooks Series. Hippocrene Books. ISBN 9780781804172.


== External links ==

## List of museums in Armenia
This is a list of museums in Armenia.

History Museum of Armenia
Mesrop Mashtots Institute of Ancient Manuscripts
National Gallery of Armenia
Yerevan History Museum
Charents Museum of Literature and Arts
Cafesjian Center for the Arts
Tumanyan Matchbox Label Museum
ARF History Museum
Erebuni Museum of the Erebuni Fortress
Modern Art Museum of Yerevan
Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute
Dzitoghtsyan Museum of National Architecture
Zoological Museum-Institute
Natural History Museum of Armenia
Geological Museum after H. Karapetyan
Sergei Parajanov Museum
Mother Armenia Military Museum
Middle East Art Museum
Armenia Ethnography Museum
Armenian Medical Museum

House-museums, biography
General Andranik Museum of Patriotic Movement
House-Museum of Aram Khachaturian
House-Museum of Hovhannes Tumanyan
House-Museum of Yeghishe Charents
House-Museum of Avetik Isahakyan
House-Museum of Alexander Spendiaryan
House-Museum of Yervand Kochar
House-Museum of Khachatur Abovian
House Museum of Minas Avetisyan
House-Museum of Derenik Demirchian
House-Museum of Martiros Saryan
House-Museum of Stepan Shahumyan
House-Museum of Hovhannes Shiraz
House-Museum of Silva Kaputikyan

See also
 
List of museums in the Republic of Artsakh
Museums and libraries in Yerevan
List of museums in Yerevan


== References ==