--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Mali
FILE_NAME: country_mali.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:48:05
----------------

# Mali

## General Overview
Mali, officially the Republic of Mali, is a landlocked country in West Africa. It is the eighth-largest country in Africa and the 23rd largest country in the world, with an area of 1,240,192 square kilometres (478,841 sq mi). 
The country is bordered to the north by Algeria, to the east by Niger, to the northwest by Mauritania, to the south by Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast, and to the west by Guinea and Senegal. The population of Mali is about 25.20 million, 47.19% of which are estimated to be under the age of 15 in 2024. Its capital and largest city is Bamako. French was the official language of Mali until 2022, when it was replaced by 13 African languages, with Bambara being the first language of the majority of the population.
Mali's northern borders reach deep into the middle of the Sahara Desert. The country's southern part, where the majority of inhabitants live, is in the Sudanian savanna and has the Niger and Senegal rivers running through it. The country's economy centres on agriculture and mining with its most prominent natural resources including gold, which represents 80% of its exports, and cotton. Mali is one of the poorest and least developed countries in the world.
Mali was part of three successive powerful and wealthy West African empires that controlled trans-Saharan trade: the Ghana Empire (for which Ghana is named), the Mali Empire (for which Mali is named), and the Songhai Empire. At its peak in 1300, the Mali Empire was the wealthiest country in Africa with its 14th-century emperor Mansa Musa believed to be one of the wealthiest individuals in history. Besides being a hub of trade and mining, medieval Mali was a centre of Islam, culture and knowledge, with Timbuktu becoming a renowned place of education with its university, one of the oldest in the world and still active. The expanding Songhai Empire absorbed the empire in 1468, followed by a Saadian army which defeated the Songhai in 1591.
In the late 19th century, during the Scramble for Africa, France seized control of Mali, making it a part of French Sudan; as the Sudanese Republic, a brief federation with Senegal was formed, achieving independence in 1960. After Senegal's withdrawal, the Republic of Mali was established. After a long period of one-party rule, a coup in 1991 led to a new constitution and the establishment of Mali as a democratic, multi-party state. From then until 2012 Mali experienced economic growth and increased civil liberties, though this began to reverse after 2002. Since independence, there have been four rebellions involving Tuareg people, which occurred from 1962 to 1964, 1990 to 1995, 2007 to 2009, and since 2012. 
In January 2012, an armed conflict broke out in northern Mali, in which Tuareg rebels took control of a territory in the north, and in April declared the secession of a new state, Azawad. The conflict was complicated by a military coup in March 2012 and later fighting between Tuareg and other rebel factions. In response to territorial gains, the French military launched Operation Serval in January 2013. A month later, Malian and French forces partially recaptured the north, though the conflict continued.
Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta was elected president in 2013, but allegations of fraud during the 2020 parliamentary election led to mass protests. Keïta was removed in a coup led by Assimi Goïta, who established himself as military ruler of Mali after another coup in 2021. In 2025, all political parties were dissolved and Goïta was granted a five-year presidential term, renewable without elections. The al-Qaeda affiliate JNIM imposed a fuel blockade on major cities, causing economic disruption, and in 2026 launched a joint offensive with Tuareg separatists.

Etymology
The name Mali is taken from the name of the Mali Empire. It means "the place where the king lives" which is meant to show strength.
Fourteenth-century Maghrebi traveller Ibn Battuta reported that the capital of the empire was called Mali. One Mandinka tradition tells that the legendary first emperor Sundiata Keita changed himself into a hippopotamus upon his death in the Sankarani River and that it was possible to find villages in the area of this river called "old Mali". A study of Malian proverbs noted that in old Mali, there is a village called Malikoma, which means "New Mali", and that Mali could have formerly been the name of a city.
Another theory suggests that Mali is a Fulani pronunciation of the name of the Mande peoples. It is suggested that a sound shift led to the change, whereby in Fulani the alveolar segment /nd/ shifts to /l/ and the terminal vowel denasalizes and raises, leading "Manden" to shift to /mali/.

History
Before colonization
The rock art in the Sahara suggests that northern Mali has been inhabited since 10,000 BC, when the Sahara was fertile and rich in wildlife. Early ceramics have been discovered at the central Malian site of Ounjougou dating to about 9,400 BC, and are believed to represent an instance of the independent invention of pottery in the region. Farming took place by 5000 BC and iron was used by around 500 BC.
In the first millennium BC, early cities and towns were created by Mande peoples related to the Soninke people, along the middle Niger River in central Mali, including Dia which began from around 900 BC, and reached its peak around 600 BC, and Djenne-Djenno, which lasted from around 300 BC to 900 AD. Through approximately 6th century BC and 4th century BC, the lucrative trans-Saharan trade in pack-animals, gold, salt and slaves had begun, facilitating the rise of West Africa's great empires.
There are a few references to Mali in early Islamic literature. Among these are references to "Pene" and "Malal" in the work of al-Bakri in 1068, the story of the conversion of an early ruler, known to Ibn Khaldun (by 1397) as Barmandana, and a few geographical details in the work of al-Idrisi.
Mali was once part of three famed West African empires which controlled trans-Saharan trade in gold, salt, other precious commodities, and slaves majorly during the reign of Mansa Musa from c. 1312 – c. 1337. These Sahelian kingdoms had neither rigid geopolitical boundaries nor rigid ethnic identities. The earliest of these empires was the Ghana Empire, which was dominated by the Soninke, a Mande-speaking people. The empire expanded throughout West Africa from the eighth century until 1078, when it was conquered by the Almoravids.
The Battle of Kirina in 1235, culminated in a victory for the Mandinka under the command of the exiled prince Sundiata Keita, which led to the downfall of the Sosso Empire.

The Mali Empire later formed on the upper Niger River, and reached the height of power in the 14th century. Under the Mali Empire, the ancient cities of Djenné and Timbuktu were centers of both trade and Islamic learning. The empire later declined as a result of internal intrigue, ultimately being supplanted by the Songhai Empire. The Songhai had long been a major power in West Africa subject to the Mali Empire's rule.
In the late 14th century, the Songhai gradually gained independence from the Mali Empire and expanded, ultimately subsuming the entire eastern portion of the Mali Empire. The Songhai Empire's eventual collapse was largely the result of the Moroccan invasion of 1591 under the command of Judar Pasha. The fall of the Songhai Empire marked the end of the region's role as a trading crossroads. Following the establishment of sea routes by the European powers, the trans-Saharan trade routes lost significance. At that time, the Mali Empire's abundance in wealth expanded its commercial assets of salt and gold.
One of the worst famines in the region's recorded history occurred in the 18th century. According to John Iliffe, "The worst crises were in the 1680s, when famine extended from the Senegambian coast to the Upper Nile and 'many sold themselves for slaves, only to get a sustenance', and especially in 1738–1756, when West Africa's greatest recorded subsistence crisis, due to drought and locusts, reportedly killed half the population of Timbuktu."

French colonial rule
Mali fell under the control of France during the Scramble for Africa in the late 19th century. By 1905, most of the area was under firm French control as a part of French Sudan. 
In November 1915, a large anti-French uprising broke out among the tribes in the regions of present-day Mali and Burkina Faso. The last resistance was suppressed only in September 1916. During the suppression of the uprising, over 100 villages were destroyed by French colonial troops.
On 24 November 1958, French Sudan (which changed its name to the Sudanese Republic) became an autonomous republic within the French Community. In January 1959, Mali and Senegal united to become the Mali Federation.

Independence
The Mali Federation gained independence from France on 20 June 1960. Senegal withdrew from the federation in August 1960, which allowed the Sudanese Republic to become the independent Republic of Mali on 22 September 1960, and that date is now the country's Independence Day.
Modibo Keïta was elected the first president. He quickly established a one-party state, adopted an independent African and socialist orientation with close ties to the East, and implemented extensive nationalization of economic resources. In 1960, the population of Mali was reported to be about 4.1 million. On 19 November 1968, following progressive economic decline, the Keïta regime was overthrown in a bloodless military coup led by Moussa Traoré, a day which is now commemorated as Liberation Day.

Socialism under President Modibo Keïta, 1960-1968
After Modibo Keïta became the President of the Republic of Mali on 22nd September 1960, the Malian government announced a socialist plan for development. The government then introduced socialist policies with a focus on economic development, aimed at achieving social changes in the country, especially transforming rural populations and communities.
The government announced a one-party state after the independence of Mali, banning other political parties with the only legal political party being the US-RDA (Sudanese Union – African Democratic Rally / Union Soudanaise – Rassemblement Démocratique Africain). Those who tried to create a political opposition were arrested, such as Mamadou Faïnké who was arrested in 1964 and sentenced to life in prison. Prior to independence, Keïta and the US-RDA campaigned against colonial and authoritarian rule, advocating for a democratic system in its place. This, however, did not happen and rather it became a Marxist-Leninist state. Keïta adapted the Marxist-Leninist ideology for African socialism, moving past the development of capitalism and instead opting for immediate strict control over foreign investments and involvement in the economy.
Soon after independence in 1960, the government under Keïta introduced a national civil service programme, service civique rural, to help the development of Mali as a socialist and self-sustaining independent country. The service targeted men in rural Mali aged 18-21 and in the early 1960s, when almost 60% of Mali's population was under the age of 25, had assembled around 40,000 young men. The national civil service outlined a 2-year programme of education and training to prepare the young men for the handling of their own duties in their communities as peasant farmers. As part of the programme, men were taught methods of modern agriculture while working on state owned farms, and they took lessons in literacy and were taught the socialist values that the Malian government expected from them. The programme saw the use of young people as labourers for the state which led to significant desertions and a declining number of young men being recruited. Some people saw comparisons between the national civil service and forced labour under colonial rule. A 1962 report from The International Labour Organization (ILO) deemed the national service scheme in Mali unlawful as it did not follow the Forced Labour Convention that had made it illegal in 1957. A further report from 1962 stated that the Malian government had submitted only 1 of 11 annual reports to the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations regarding labour conventions that had been signed and ratified by Mali previously.
Keïta viewed education as essential to the development of Mali as a socialist state. At the time of independence, 93% of the population in Mali were illiterate in French, 90% illiterate in Arabic, and very few people were given a Western education. Those who did receive a Western education were part of the elites after independence. France used education in Mali to create an elite loyal to France and for the exploitation of people and resources. At the time of independence, there were 12 professors, 10 doctors, 3 pharmacists, and 3 veterinary doctors in Mali. On 17th September 1962, the government passed the Educational Reform Law which introduced 9 years of mandatory education across Mali. In 1964, two years after the law was passed, the number of school-age Malians in education had more than tripled the pre-independence numbers with 24% in school and the number of people in secondary education had increased from 434 students in 1962-1963 to 1,325 by 1966-1967. Keïta had support from the Soviet Union in improving education, founding the Higher Administrative School of Bamako, the first institution of higher education in Mali, and created education centres for agriculture and medicine. Education was used to promote socialist ideology across Mali and was adapted to fit the national aims of Keïta's economic and political policies. The education system was changed to focus on African history, culture, and needs rather than that of the former colonial power France. In 1964, new teaching materials focused on African socialism was introduced in schools. Despite the increases in the number of people in education across Mali, numbers were still restricted due to the lack of teachers and resources.
In July 1962, Keïta announced The Bank of the Republic of Mali (La Banque de la République de Mali) which was responsible for minting its own currency, the Malian franc. Keïta believed that Mali having its own currency was a sign of sovereignty, stating in a speech that "political power is always and necessarily accompanied by the sovereign right of minting money, that monetary power is inseparable from national sovereignty". It was revealed that the Malian franc would be equal to the CFA franc, the currency used in the Franc zone. The Franc zone was created by France for continued monetary influence over former French colonies including Mali. Nationalising the banking industry gave the Malian government more control, reducing economic dependence and influence from foreign countries including France. Throughout the 1960s inflation increased, the economy declined, and so the Malian franc in 1967 was devalued by 50% against the CFA franc to prevent further inflation rates and further economic decline. On 19th December 1967, Keïta announced an agreement between Mali and France that would later lead to Mali's re-entry into the UMOA (West African Monetary Union / Union monétaire ouest-africaine) in 1984.
Opposition and critics of President Keïta and the US-RDA government were met with violence and imprisonment. Political opponents of the government were arrested and some were sent to Kidal, a desert town in northern Mali, and imprisoned there. Fily Dabo Sissoko, who founded the PSP (Sudanese Progressive Party / Parti Progressite Soudanais) which was a political opponent of the US-RDA, was imprisoned in Kidal and died there, supposedly under the orders of Keïta, though this is not confirmed. Following the establishment of Mali's own currency in 1962, protestors opposing the government and the new monetary policies were arrested and sent to prison.
Keïta oversaw the nationalisation of various sectors of the economy to help the development of Mali as a socialist state. To further control the economy and the development of industrialisation, Keïta created new state-owned enterprises. These enterprises spanned across different industries including textiles, food processing, tobacco, cotton, and radio manufacturing.

Moussa Traoré regime
The subsequent military-led regime, with Traoré as president, attempted to reform the economy. His efforts were frustrated by political turmoil and a devastating drought from 1968 to 1974, in which famine killed thousands of people. The Traoré regime faced student unrest beginning in the late 1970s and three coup attempts. The Traoré regime repressed all dissenters until the late 1980s.

Opposition to the corrupt and dictatorial regime of General Moussa Traoré grew during the 1980s. During this time strict programs, imposed to satisfy demands of the International Monetary Fund, brought increased hardship upon the country's population, while elites close to the government supposedly lived in growing wealth. The government continued to attempt economic reforms, and the populace became increasingly dissatisfied. In response to growing demands for multi-party democracy, the Traoré regime allowed some limited political liberalization in the late 1980s, but refused to usher in a full-fledged democratic system. 
In 1990, cohesive opposition movements began to emerge, and was complicated by the turbulent rise of ethnic violence in the north following the return of many Tuaregs who had migrated to Algeria and Libya during the drought. Peaceful student protests in January 1991 were brutally suppressed, with mass arrests and torture of leaders and participants. Scattered acts of rioting and vandalism of public buildings followed, but most actions by the dissidents remained nonviolent.
From 22 March through 26 March 1991, mass pro-democracy rallies and a nationwide strike was held in both urban and rural communities, which became known as les évenements ("the events") or the March Revolution. In Bamako, in response to mass demonstrations organized by university students and later joined by trade unionists and others, soldiers opened fire indiscriminately on the nonviolent demonstrators. Riots broke out briefly following the shootings. Barricades as well as roadblocks were erected and Traoré declared a state of emergency and imposed a nightly curfew. Despite an estimated loss of 300 lives over the course of four days, nonviolent protesters continued to return to Bamako each day demanding the resignation of the dictatorial president and the implementation of democratic policies.
By 26 March, the growing refusal of soldiers to fire into the largely nonviolent protesting crowds turned into a full-scale tumult. Military soldiers clashed with peaceful protesters, resulting in the massacre of dozens under the orders of Traoré. That afternoon, Lieutenant Colonel Amadou Toumani Touré announced on the radio that he had arrested the dictatorial president, Moussa Traoré. He and three associates were, tried, convicted and received the death sentence for their role in this massacre. The date is now a national holiday in Mali. The coup is remembered as Mali's March Revolution of 1991.

Multi-party democracy
Opposition parties were legalized, a transitional government was formed and a national congress of civil and political groups met to draft a new democratic constitution to be approved by a national referendum. In 1992, Alpha Oumar Konaré won Mali's first democratic, multi-party presidential election, before being re-elected for a second term in 1997, which was the last allowed under the constitution. Amadou Toumani Touré, a retired general who had been the leader of the military aspect of the 1991 democratic uprising, was elected in 2002. During this democratic period Mali was regarded as one of the most politically and socially stable countries in Africa.
Slavery persists in Mali today with as many as 200,000 people held in direct servitude to a master. In the Tuareg Rebellion of 2012, ex-slaves were a vulnerable population with reports of some slaves being recaptured by their former masters.

Northern Mali conflict
In January 2012 a Tuareg rebellion began in northern Mali, led by the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA). In March, military officer Amadou Sanogo seized power in a coup d'état, citing Touré's failures in quelling the rebellion, and leading to sanctions and an embargo by the Economic Community of West African States. The MNLA quickly took control of the north, declaring its independence as Azawad. However, Islamist groups, including Ansar Dine and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), who had helped the MNLA defeat the government, turned on the Tuareg and took control of the north with the goal of implementing sharia in Mali.
On 11 January 2013, the French Armed Forces intervened at the request of the interim government of president Dioncounda Traoré. On 30 January, the coordinated advance of the French and Malian troops claimed to have retaken the last remaining Islamist stronghold of Kidal, which was also the last of three northern provincial capitals. On 2 February, French president François Hollande joined Dioncounda Traoré in a public appearance in recently recaptured Timbuktu.

In August 2013, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita was elected as the new president of Mali in the second round of the election.

Conflict in Central Mali
In the central Mali province of Mopti, conflict has escalated since 2015 between agricultural communities like the Dogon and the Bambara, and the pastoral Fula (or Fulani) people. Historically, the two sides have fought over access to land and water, factors which have been exacerbated by climate change as the Fula move into new areas. The Dogon and the Bambara communities have formed "self-defense groups" to fight the Fula. They accuse the Fula of working with armed Islamists linked to al-Qaeda. While some Fula have joined Islamist groups, Human Rights Watch reports that the links have been "exaggerated and instrumentalized by different actors for opportunistic ends".

Added a top Mali military commander:I've discussed the growing violence with my commanders and with village chiefs from all sides. Yes, sure, there are jihadists in this zone, but the real problem is banditry, animal theft, score settling – people are enriching themselves using the fight against terrorists as a cover.
The conflict has seen the creation and growth of Dogon and Bambara militias. The government of Mali is suspected of supporting some of these groups under the guise of being proxies in the war against Islamists in the Northern Mali conflict. The government denies this. One such militia is the Dogon group Dan Na Ambassagou, created in 2016.

In the 2018 Malian presidential election held on 29 July 2018, no candidate received more than 50% of the vote in the first round. A runoff was held on 12 August 2018 between the top two candidates, incumbent president Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta of the Rally for Mali and Soumaïla Cissé of the Union for the Republic and Democracy, and Keïta was re-elected with 67% of the vote.
In September 2018, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue negotiated a unilateral ceasefire with Dan Na Ambassagou "in the context of the conflict which opposes the group to other community armed groups in central Mali". However, the group has been blamed for the 24 March 2019 massacre of 160 Fula villagers. The group denied the attack, but afterwards Malian president Keita ordered the group to disband. The UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, warned of a growing ethnicization of the conflict. By 2020, more than 600,000 people had been displaced by the conflict in Mali. The United Nations reported that the number of children killed in the conflict in the first six months of 2019 was twice as many for the entire year of 2018. Many of the children have been killed in intercommunal attacks attributed to ethnic militias, with the majority of attacks occurring around Mopti. It is reported that around 900 schools have closed down and that armed militias are recruiting children.
During the first week of October 2019, two jihadist attacks in the towns of Boulikessi and Mondoro killed more than 25 Mali soldiers near the border with Burkina Faso. President Keïta declared that "no military coup will prevail in Mali", continuing by saying that he does not think it "is on the agenda at all and cannot worry us". On 1 November 2019, the IS-GS militants killed at least 50 soldiers in the 2019 Indelimane attack in the Ménaka Region of Mali. In February 2020, Human Rights Watch documented atrocities against civilians in Central Mali and said that at least 456 civilians were killed, while hundreds were injured from January 2019 until November.

2020s coups and Assimi Goïta junta
Popular unrest began on 5 June 2020 following irregularities in the March and April parliamentary elections, including outrage against the kidnapping of opposition leader Soumaïla Cissé. Between 11 and 23 deaths followed protests that took place from 10 to 13 June. In July, President Keïta dissolved the constitutional court.
Members of the military led by Colonel Assimi Goïta and Colonel-Major Ismaël Wagué in Kati, Koulikoro Region, began a mutiny on 18 August 2020. President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta and Prime Minister Boubou Cissé were arrested, and shortly after midnight Keïta announced his resignation, saying he did not want to see any bloodshed. Wagué announced the formation of the National Committee for the Salvation of the People (CNSP) and promised elections in the future. A curfew was begun and the streets of Bamako were quiet. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) condemned the coup and demanded that Keïta be reinstated as president.
On 12 September 2020, the CNSP agreed to an 18-month political transition to civilian rule. Shortly after, Bah N'daw was named interim president by a group of 17 electors, with Goïta being appointed vice president. The government was inaugurated on 25 September 2020. On 18 January 2021, the transitional government announced that the CNSP had been disbanded, almost four months after had been promised under the initial agreement.
Tensions between the civilian transitional government and the military ran high after the handover of power in September 2020. The tensions came to a head on 24 May 2021 after a cabinet reshuffle, where two leaders of the 2020 military coup – Sadio Camara and Modibo Kone – were replaced by N'daw's administration. Later that day, journalists reported that three key civilian leaders – President N'daw, Prime Minister Moctar Ouane and Defence Minister Souleymane Doucouré, were being detained in a military base in Kati, outside Bamako. On 7 June 2021, Mali's military commander Assimi Goïta was sworn into office as the new interim president.

In 2022 and 2023, the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara saw major gains in the Mali War, occupying large swathes of territory in southeastern Mali. Ansongo and Tidermène were also captured by the group. By mid-2023, the militant group had doubled the amount of territory it controlled since the overthrow of the previous government and establishment of the junta.
On 10 January 2022, Mali announced the closure of its borders and recalled several ambassadors to ECOWAS countries in response to sanctions placed on Mali for deferring elections for four years. On 4 February, France's ambassador was expelled. According to Human Rights Watch, Malian troops and suspected Russian mercenaries from the Wagner Group executed around 300 civilian men in central Mali in March 2022. France had started withdrawing French troops from Mali in February 2022, commencing the end of Operation Barkhane. On 2 May, the military government announced breaking its defence accords concluded in 2013 with France, constituting an additional step in the deterioration of Malian–French relations. This latest announcement has been criticized by French authorities and considered as "illegitimate". A UN panel reported that in the first three months of 2022, 543 civilians were killed and 269 wounded, warning the 2015 peace agreement between the government and pro-independence groups was threatened by a potential risk of confrontation for the first time in five years. The report also noted a sharp increase in the number of people needing humanitarian assistance over the previous year.
In June 2023, Mali removed French as an official language with the approval of a new constitution by 97% of voters in a referendum conducted by the junta.
On 7 September 2023, al-Qaeda linked JNIM militants attacked a vessel on the Niger River, killing at least 154 civilians.
In July 2024, CSP-DPA rebels and JNIM militants killed dozens of Russian mercenaries and Malian government forces during the Battle of Tinzaouaten. On 5 August 2024 the Republic of Mali announced that it was severing diplomatic relations with Ukraine.
On 17 September 2024, al-Qaeda linked JNIM militants attacked several locations across Bamako, killing at least 77 people and injuring 255 others. 
In July 2025, JNIM began a strategy to blockade the government-controlled cities from foreign fuel imports and to cut them off from each other. Mali depends on foreign fuel imports, receiving 95% of its fuel from Senegal or Ivory Coast. Starting from 1 July, JNIM attacks cut off connections to Mauritania and Senegal, and they were followed by similar attacks in the south near Ivory Coast and Guinea. From 3 September, JNIM imposed a blockade against cities in southern Mali, including the capital Bamako, after the government had stopped fuel sales in rural areas. This increased fuel prices in the capital by 500% and has led to economic disruption, lines at gas stations, school closures, and cancellations of flights from the Bamako International Airport. In early September the Malian truckers' union stopped operations for two weeks due to the dangerous conditions along roads in southern Mali, leaving 1,000 fuel trucks waiting in Ivory Coast. On 28 October, the U.S. Embassy advised all American citizens to leave the country immediately because of increasing instability, and to do so by plane, because of "terrorist attacks along national highways".
On 25 April 2026 widespread unrest was reported from locations across the country, apparently sponsored by a diverse range of rebel groups.

Geography
Mali is a landlocked country in West Africa, located southwest of Algeria. It lies between latitudes 10° and 25°N, and longitudes 13°W and 5°E. Mali borders Algeria to the north-northeast, Niger to the east, Burkina Faso to the southeast, Ivory Coast to the south, Guinea to the south-west, and Senegal to the west and Mauritania to the north-west.

At 1,240,192 square kilometres (478,841 sq mi), Mali is the 24th-largest country in the world and the eighth-largest country in Africa. It is comparable in size to South Africa or Angola. Most of the country lies in the southern Sahara Desert, which produces an extremely hot, dust-laden Sudanian savanna zone. Mali is mostly flat, rising to rolling northern plains covered by sand. The Adrar des Ifoghas massif lies in the northeast.
Mali lies in the torrid zone and is among the hottest countries in the world. The thermal equator, which matches the hottest spots year-round on the planet based on the mean daily annual temperature, crosses the country. Most of Mali receives negligible rainfall and droughts are very frequent. Late April to early October is the rainy season in the southernmost area. During this time, flooding of the Niger River is common, creating the Inner Niger Delta. The vast northern desert part of Mali has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh) with long, extremely hot summers and scarce rainfall which decreases northwards. The central area has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh) with very high temperatures year-round, a long, intense dry season and a brief, irregular rainy season. The southern areas have a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen climate classification Aw). 
Mali has considerable natural resources, with gold, uranium, phosphates, kaolinite, salt and limestone being most widely exploited. Mali is estimated to have in excess of 17,400 tonnes of uranium (measured + indicated + inferred). In 2012, a further uranium mineralized north zone was identified. Mali faces numerous environmental challenges, including desertification, deforestation, soil erosion, and inadequate supplies of potable water.

Biodiversity
Five terrestrial ecoregions lie within Mali's borders: Sahelian Acacia savanna, West Sudanian savanna, Inner Niger Delta flooded savanna, South Saharan steppe and woodlands, and West Saharan montane xeric woodlands. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.16/10, ranking it 51st globally out of 172 countries.

Politics and government
Government
Mali is led by the transitional president, Assimi Goïta, who is assisted by the prime minister, Abdoulaye Maïga, and the National Transitional Council that replaced the National Assembly following the 2020 coup. However, in practice, Goïta and a military junta consisting of four other officers, the National Committee for the Salvation of the People, have complete control over the political system. The original constitution established a Mali as a secular constitutional republic with a separation of powers between executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and identifies eight state institutions. These included the presidency; the government; the National Assembly; the Supreme, Constitutional, and High Courts; the High Council of Territorial Units; and the Economic, Social, and Cultural Council. The constitution was enacted on 25 February 1992, following the 12 January 1992 referendum that was held after a national conference in 1991. It was replaced by the junta with a new constitution on 22 July 2023.
The president, who is elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term that is renewable once, is the head of state that serves as the guardian of the constitution, the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and appoints the prime minister and other government ministers. The prime minister is the head of government. The National Assembly of Mali was a unicameral legislature consisting of deputies elected by universal suffrage to a term of five years. It convened twice a year, or in extraordinary sessions called by the prime minister or the parliamentary majority. The transitional government pushed back the timetable for a new election, initially to be held in February 2022, to February 2024. In exchange for the government's commitment to a 2024 election, ECOWAS agreed to lift sanctions on the country. In July 2025 a law granted Goïta a five-year term that is renewable indefinitely, and there are no immediate plans to hold elections.
The constitution provides for an independent judiciary, tasked with the application of the laws of the republic and the protection of civil liberties, which are guaranteed by both the 1992 and 2023 constitutions. Mali's highest courts are the Supreme Court, which has both judicial and administrative powers, and a separate Constitutional Court that provides judicial review of legislative acts and serves as an election arbiter. Various lower courts exist, though village chiefs and elders resolve most local disputes in rural areas. In practice, many of the freedoms that were gained during the development of democracy after 1991, and were relatively well respected, have been suppressed during the 2020s military junta. There is no real separation of powers, with the junta being dominant. Freedom of association, expression, and assembly are undermined by the transitional government, and members of the judiciary and civil service have been dismissed for criticizing the junta.
According to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy Indices and Democracy Tracker, Mali performs in the low range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in political representation and rule of law. The Economist Democracy Index classified Mali as an "authoritarian regime" in 2024, ranking it 139 out of the 167 countries that were evaluated. Freedom House describes Mali as "not free" in 2026. The Fragile States Index ranked Mali as the 14th most fragile country in the world, out of 179 countries, in 2024.

Foreign relations
Until 2012, Mali's foreign policy orientation had become increasingly pragmatic and pro-Western over time. Starting from the 1990s, Mali's successive governments worked with the IMF to obtain debt relief, as well as to end the country's political and economic isolation. After the institution of a democratic form of government, Mali's relations with the West in general and with the United States in particular have improved significantly. Mali has a longstanding relationship with France, a former colonial ruler. Mali was active in regional organizations such as the African Union until its suspension over the 2012 Malian coup d'état.
After the coups in 2020 and 2021, Mali took a more belligerent stance towards the UN, ECOWAS, and France. At the request of the government, France withdrew its troops from Mali in 2022, and the UN followed in 2023. The Alliance of Sahel States was formed in 2023 between Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso after they experienced similar coups in the early 2020s. It is anti-French, anti-neocolonialism and anti-ECOWAS, demonstrated with acts including the removal of French as an official language in all three states. Mali ended its membership in ECOWAS in 2025. The country expanded its relationship with Russia, acquiring military equipment and assistance.
Working to control and resolve regional conflicts, such as in Ivory Coast, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, is one of Mali's major foreign policy goals. Mali feels threatened by the potential for the spillover of conflicts in neighboring states, and relations with those neighbors are often uneasy. General insecurity along borders in the north, including cross-border banditry and terrorism, remain troubling issues in regional relations.
In early 2019, Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for an attack on a United Nations base in Mali that killed 10 peacekeepers from Chad. 25 people were reported to have been injured in the attack.

Military
Mali has 41,000 troops in its military and paramilitary forces. These include the Malian Armed Forces (FAMa), which consist of the Army and the Air Force, numbering 19,000 and 2,000 personnel, respectively, as of 2025. The Army is organized into nine motorized infantry battalions and several support and special forces units. There are also paramilitary forces with 20,000 personnel, including 6,000 in the Gendarmerie, 10,000 in the National Guard, 1,000 in the National Police, and 3,000 in the militia. The Gendarmerie includes eight paramilitary companies and an air transport group, while the National Guard has six camel cavalry companies and a special forces anti-terrorism unit. The Malian military is under-equipped and has a limited capability for the manufacturing and maintenance of equipment.
In addition, Russia's Africa Corps has between 1,500 and 3,500 troops across Mali.

Territorial units
The administrative structure of Mali is currently organized on four levels: 19 regions, 159 cercles, 466 arrondissements, and 819 communes or 12,712 villages, along with the capital district of Bamako. Each region has a governor, and is represented on the High Council of Territorial Units by indirectly elected national councilors. Many rural areas of Mali lack any state presence, with the administrative structure being distributed unevenly. This is because of the size of the country and the persistent insecurity. The Malian government has used the phrase "return of the state and administrations to fragile areas" to describe its stabilization strategy.
Mali has been implementing decentralization since 1993. There were eight regions and the district of Bamako from 1996, which later became ten regions as of 2006. Since 2023, Mali has added nine new regions to its administrative structure, bringing the total to 19 regions plus the district of Bamako. This reorganization aims to improve governance and bring public services closer to local populations. This initiative continues the decentralization efforts that began with the creation of the Taoudénit and Ménaka regions in 2016. The implementation of the two newest regions, Taoudénit (formerly part of Tombouctou Region) and Ménaka (formerly Ménaka Cercle in Gao Region), has been ongoing since January 2016; a governor and transitional council has been appointed for both regions.
The regions and the capital district are:

Economy
As of 2024, the country had a nominal GDP of US$26.78 billion and a PPP-adjusted GDP of $81.45 billion. Mali remains one of the poorest and least developed countries in the world, and has a large informal economy. It has heavily relied on assistance from foreign donors, which have reduced their activities during the instability of the 2020s. Since then the transitional government has used regional financial markets to finance its deficit. Most Malians (95%) have informal jobs, with 80% of the population involved in farming, fishing, or raising livestock. The agriculture sector is the largest, accounting for a third of the GDP. Mali's export economy is dominated by gold mining, which represented 80% of the country's exports in 2024. Though cotton is a distant second as an export commodity, one-fifth of the population works in that industry. Ivory Coast, Senegal, and China are Mali's top import partners, while South Africa, Switzerland, and Australia are top export partners.
Economic development has been undermined by instability, limited infrastructure and electricity, and government corruption. The economy is vulnerable to fluctuations in the world price of gold and cotton. Despite this, there has been an economic recovery since the COVID-19 pandemic in Mali and the ECOWAS sanctions in 2022. As a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union, Mali uses the CFA franc that is issued by the Central Bank of West African States. As a result, it experiences monetary stability and low inflation. However, businesses in Mali have struggled to get access to financing in recent years. Mali is also connected with the French government by agreement since the creation of the bank in 1962. Today all seven countries of BCEAO are connected to French Central Bank.

Mali underwent economic reform, beginning in 1988 by signing agreements with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. During 1988 to 1996, Mali's government largely reformed public enterprises. Since the agreement, sixteen enterprises were privatized, 12 partially privatized, and 20 liquidated. In 2005, the Malian government conceded a railroad company to the Savage Corporation. Two major companies, Societé de Telecommunications du Mali (SOTELMA) and the Cotton Ginning Company (CMDT), were expected to be privatized in 2008. Between 1992 and 1995, Mali implemented an economic adjustment programme that resulted in economic growth and a reduction in financial imbalances. The programme increased social and economic conditions, and led to Mali joining the World Trade Organization on 31 May 1995. Mali is also a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA). 
Mali was ranked 135th out of 139 in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Agriculture
Mali's key industry is agriculture. Cotton is the country's largest crop export and is exported west throughout Senegal and Ivory Coast. During 2002, 620,000 tons of cotton were produced in Mali but cotton prices declined significantly in 2003. In addition to cotton, Mali produces rice, millet, corn, vegetables, tobacco, and tree crops. Agriculture in Mali is undermined by erratic rainfall, flooding, low usage of agricultural equipment, and a volatile security situation.
Eighty percent of Malian workers are employed in agriculture. 15% of Malian workers are employed in the service sector. Seasonal variations lead to regular temporary unemployment of agricultural workers. Around 127,000 hectares of agricultural land are managed by the state-owned Niger River Authority (Office du Niger).

Mining
Gold is mined in the southern region, and Mali was the second largest producer of gold in Africa as of 2024. In 2015, the country has produced 41 metric tonnes of gold. The emergence of gold as Mali's leading export product since 1999 has helped mitigate some of the negative impact of the cotton and Ivory Coast crises. Other natural resources include kaolin, salt, phosphate, and limestone.
In 1991, with the assistance of the International Development Association, Mali relaxed the enforcement of mining codes which led to renewed foreign interest and investment in the mining industry. In 2023, Mali adopted a new mining code that raises the requirement of state and local investor ownership of mining companies to 35% from the previous 20%, seeking to increase revenue. The code has led to disputes with established mining companies.

Energy
Electricity and water are maintained by the Energie du Mali (EDM), and textiles are generated by Industry Textile du Mali, or ITEMA. Outside the cities, the Malian Agency for Rural Electrification (AMADER) allows private companies to generate and distribute electricity to villages. EDM is heavily financed by the government and regional multinational banks. As of 2023, the majority (66%) of electricity in Mali was generated by diesel generators, followed by hydroelectric generation. Solar represented 2.7% of generation capacity. 
In the cities, 55% of the population have access to EDM. Overall, the national accessibility to electricity is 40%, and it is just 20% in rural areas. Powers cuts are common, and as of 2024 Bamako and other areas experienced blackouts that lasted up to 18 hours.

Transportation
Mali has 89,000 kilometres (55,000 mi) of roads, which are in poor condition. The most significant highway in the country is the Trans-Sahelian Highway, which links three major cities—Bamako, Sikasso, and Kayes—with Dakar in Senegal, and N'Djamena in Chad via Burkina Faso, Niger, and Nigeria. The section from Bamako to the Senegalese border is called the Northern Bamako-Dakar Corridor, and is Mali's most important roadway, with the majority of its imports and exports passing on it. Domestically, the Northern Bamako-Dakar Corridor uses Malian National Routes 1 and 3. Another major highway is the Trans-Saharan Road Corridor, which uses National Routes 6, 16, and 17 to connect Bamako to Ségou, Mopti, Sévaré, and Gao; as well as to Algiers in Algeria, and Lagos in Nigeria via Niger.
The Dakar–Bamako Railway runs parallel to part of the Northern Bamako-Dakar Corridor. The Malian section has 641 kilometres (398 mi) of track. The railway was managed by foreign companies until they ceased operations in 2010. In 2016, Mali and Senegal formed the joint company Dakar Bamako Ferroviaire (DBF) to revive the line. Passenger service between Kayes and Bamako was restarted in June 2023 after five years of renovation. There are also approximately 29 airports, of which 8 have paved runways. Urban areas are known for their large quantity of green and white taxicabs. A significant sum of the population is dependent on public transportation.

Demographics
In 2021, Mali's population was an estimated 21.9 million. Mali's population grew from 7.7 million in 1982 to 19.9 million in 2018. The population is predominantly rural (69.7% in 2022), and 5%–10% of Malians are nomadic. More than 90% of the population lives in the southern part of the country, especially in Bamako, which has over 4 million residents.
In 2024, about 47% of Malians were 14 years old or younger, 50% were 15–64 years old, and 3% were 65 and older. The median age was 16.4 years. The birth rate in 2024 was 40 births per 1,000, and the total fertility rate in 2024 was 5.35 children per woman. The death rate in 2024 was 8.1 deaths per 1,000. Life expectancy at birth was 63.2 years total (60.9 for males and 65.6 for females). Mali has one of the world's highest rates of infant mortality, with 57.4 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2024.

Largest cities in Mali
Ethnic groups
Mali's population encompasses a number of sub-Saharan ethnic groups. The Bambara are by far the largest single ethnic group, making up over a third of the population. According to the 2022 general population and housing census, the largest ethnic groups are the Bambara (35.9%), Fulani (Peuhl) (12.8%), Senufo/Manianka (9.4%), Malinke (8.4%), Sarakole/Soninke/Marka (8.2%), Dogon (6.1%), Sonrai (4.8%), Tuareg (3.9%), Bobo/Bwa (2.2%), Bozo (1.9%), Arabs (1.7%), with smaller ethnic groups making up the rest. In Mali and in Niger, the Moors are also known as Azawagh Arabs, named after the Azawagh region of the Sahara. They speak mainly Hassaniya Arabic, one of the regional varieties of Arabic.
In the far north, there is a division between Berber-descended Tuareg nomad populations and the darker-skinned Bella or Tamasheq people, due to the historical spread of slavery in the region. An estimated 800,000 people in Mali are descended from slaves. Slavery has persisted in Mali for centuries. The Arabic population kept slaves well into the 20th century, until slavery was suppressed by French authorities around the mid-20th century. There still persist certain hereditary servitude relationships, and according to some estimates, even today approximately 200,000 Malians are still enslaved.
Some mixed European/African descendants of Muslims of Spanish, as well as French, Irish, Italian and Portuguese origin, live in Mali, where they are known as the Arma people (1% of the nation's population).
Although Mali has enjoyed reasonably good inter-ethnic relationships based on a long history of coexistence, some hereditary servitude and bondage relationship exist, as well as ethnic tension between settled Songhai and nomadic Tuaregs of the north. Due to a backlash against the northern population after independence, Mali is now in a situation where both groups complain about discrimination on the part of the other group. This conflict also plays a role in the continuing Northern Mali conflict where there is a tension between both Tuaregs and the Malian government, and the Tuaregs and radical Islamists who are trying to establish sharia law.
There is also a small Jewish community in Mali.

Languages
In January 2022, due to deteriorating relations between Mali and the French government, the Mali government announced making Bambara the official language. In July 2023, French was dropped as an official language, becoming instead a working language. At the same time, the 13 national languages, namely Bambara, Bobo, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Hassaniya Arabic, Kassonke, Maninke, Minyanka, Senufo, the Songhai, Soninke and Tamasheq, became official languages. The lingua franca in Mali is mainly Bambara, which about 80 percent of the population can communicate in. Over 40 other African languages are spoken by the various ethnic groups of Mali.
According to the 2022 census, the languages spoken natively in Mali were Bambara by 49.9%, Fula (8.2%), Mandinka (7.1%), Soninké (6.5%), Dogon (6.0%), Songhai (4.6%), Minianka (4.2%), Tamasheq (3.9%), Sénoufo (2.8%), Bobo (1.9%), Tieyaxo Bozo (1.4%), Kassonké (1.1%), Maure or Hassaniya Arabic (0.9%), Dafing (0.3%), Samogo (0.5%), Arabic (other dialects) (0.4%), other Malian languages (0.6%), French (0.1%), other African languages (0.1%), and other non-African languages (0.1%).

Religion
Islam was introduced to West Africa in the 11th century and remains the predominant religion in much of the region. The 2022 census reported that 96.4% of Malians are Muslim (mostly non-denominational and Sunni), approximately 2.3% are Christian (about 1.4% Roman Catholic and 0.8% Protestant), and the remaining 0.7% adhere to traditional African religions such as the Dogon religion. Atheism and agnosticism are believed to be rare among Malians, most of whom practise their religion daily, though the census found 0.5% of Malians identified with no religion.
The constitution establishes a secular state and provides for freedom of religion, and the government largely respects this right.
Islam as historically practised in Mali has been malleable and adapted to local conditions; relations between Muslims and practitioners of minority religious faiths have generally been amicable.
After the 2012 imposition of sharia rule in northern parts of the country, however, Mali came to be listed high (number 7) in the Christian persecution index published by Open Doors, which described the persecution in the north as severe.

Education
Public education in Mali is in principle provided free of charge and is compulsory for nine years between the ages of seven and sixteen. The system encompasses six years of primary education beginning at age 7, followed by six years of secondary education. Mali's actual primary school enrollment rate is low, in large part because families are unable to cover the cost of uniforms, books, supplies, and other fees required to attend.
In 2017, the primary school enrollment rate was 61% (65% of males and 58% of females). In the late 1990s, the secondary school enrollment rate was 15% (20% of males and 10% of females). The education system is plagued by a lack of schools in rural areas, as well as shortages of teachers and materials.
Estimates of literacy rates in Mali range from 27–30 to 46.4%, with literacy rates significantly lower among women than men. The University of Bamako, which includes four constituent universities, is the largest university in the country and enrolls approximately 60,000 undergraduate and graduate students.

Health
Mali faces numerous health challenges related to poverty, malnutrition, and inadequate hygiene and sanitation. Mali's health and development indicators rank among the worst in the world. Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 63.2 years in 2024. In 2000, 62–65% of the population was estimated to have access to safe drinking water and only 69% to sanitation services of some kind. In 2001, the general government expenditures on health totaled about US$4 per capita at an average exchange rate.
Efforts have been made to improve nutrition, and reduce associated health problems, by encouraging women to make nutritious versions of local recipes. For example, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Aga Khan Foundation, trained women's groups to make equinut, a healthy and nutritional version of the traditional recipe di-dèguè (comprising peanut paste, honey and millet or rice flour). The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell, and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage.

Medical facilities in Mali are very limited, and medicines are in short supply. Malaria and other arthropod-borne diseases are prevalent in Mali, as are a number of infectious diseases such as cholera and tuberculosis. Mali's population also suffers from a high rate of child malnutrition and a low rate of immunization. An estimated 1.9% of the adult and children population was afflicted with HIV/AIDS that year, among the lowest rates in Sub-Saharan Africa. An estimated 85%–91% of Mali's girls and women have had female genital mutilation (2006 and 2001 data).
In 2024, approximately 7.1 million people in Mali, including over 3.8 million children, require urgent humanitarian assistance due to escalating conflict and climate crises. UNICEF is amplifying its efforts to provide essential services like health, education, and protection, while appealing for $133.5 million to address these needs. The situation is dire, with over 522,000 children lacking access to education and millions at risk of malnutrition amid underfunded humanitarian responses. Urgent action is needed to mitigate the impacts of violence, insecurity and climate change on vulnerable populations in Mali.

Gender inequality
In 2017, Mali ranked 157th out of 160 countries in the gender inequality index as reported by the United Nations Development Programme. The Malian Constitution states that it protects women's rights, however many laws exist that discriminate against women. Provisions in the laws limit women's decision-making power after marriage, in which the husband becomes superior to his wife. Women are blamed for not maintaining the appearance of their husbands and are also blamed for the actions of their children if they misbehave, which encourages the cultural attitude that women are inferior to men. The lack of participation of women in politics is due to the idea that politics is associated with men and that women should avoid this sector. Education is also an area in which boys dominate, since it is a better investment for the parents. As traditional values and practices have contributed to gender inequality in Mali, conflict and lawlessness have also influenced the growing gap in gender through gender-based violence. The unstable government of Mali has led to organizations like USAID attempting to improve the lives of the people, mainly women and girls' rights in order to re-engage the development of the country.
Religion, the patriarchal norms, and gender-based violence are major negative factors shaping the life of women in Mali. Patriarchal norms cause major gender inequalities and lead to male domination within the household. Girls learn household activities like chores, cooking, childcare, etc. at a young age and are expected to take the main responsibility of household chores throughout their life. This hampers women's ability to enter the formal workforce and leads to a lack of education of girls. Gender-based violence in Mali happens both on a national and a family level. At the national level, in 2012 the conflict in the Northern part of the country increased cases of kidnappings and rapes. The conflict also reduced women's access to resources, economy, and opportunities. At the household level, Malian women face gender-based violence through domestic violence, forced marriages, and marital rape. The Demographic Health Survey for Mali in 2013 stated that 76% of women and 54% of men believed physical harm towards women was acceptable if the women burnt food, argued back, went out without notifying her husband, or refused sexual relations with her husband. In 2024, Mali officials approved a bill criminalising intimate relations between same-sex couples.

After adjusting the entrance requirements and access to education, girls still have lower enrollment rates and less access to formal education. Drop-out rates for girls are 15% higher than that of boys because they have a higher responsibility at home and most parents refuse to allow all their children to go to school, so boys tend to become educated. Similarly, technical and vocational education has a lower numbers of girls participating and are inadequately distributed in the country because the training centers are focused in the urban cities. Finally, higher education for girls consist of short programs because early marriages prevent most girls from pursuing a longer term education program like those in science. Although women do not have the same access of education, in recent decades women have been entering and representing in decision-making positions in the Public Administration sector. Out of 147 members of Parliament, 15 were women in 2010. Recent decades show that women are slowly joining important decision-making positions which is changing the attitude and status of women in Mali, which has led to the promotion of women's rights in the political sphere.
Legislation at the international and national levels have been implemented over the decades to help promote women's rights in Mali. At the international, Mali signed the Beijing Platform for Action which suggest that women should participate in decision-making and the convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women which is the foundation to women's rights promotion. At the national level, Mali's Constitution has the Decree No. 092-073P-CTSP that claims equality to all Malian citizens and discrimination is prohibited, which has not been followed. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme (PRSP) and the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme under the Malian Government seek to improve the well-being of the citizens, and changes to governance and gender in the country. The Ministry for Advancement of Women, Children and the Family was created specifically for women and children so that their basics rights and needs get met under the law. Although there exists legislation and policy for gender equality the institutionalization of the National Gender Policy of Mali is necessary to support the importance of women's rights. Strengthening and the support of girls' and women's access to education and training is recommended to improve gender equality in Mali. The involvement of international organizations like USAID assist Mali financially to enhance their development through the efforts of the improvement of women's rights.

Culture
The varied everyday culture of Malians reflects the country's ethnic and geographic diversity. Most Malians wear flowing, colorful robes called boubous that are typical of West Africa. Malians frequently participate in traditional festivals, dances, and ceremonies.

Music
Malian musical traditions are derived from the griots, who are known as "Keepers of Memories". Malian music is diverse and has several different genres. Some famous Malian influences in music are kora virtuoso musician Toumani Diabaté, the ngoni with Bassekou Kouyate the virtuoso of the electric jeli ngoni, the late roots and blues guitarist Ali Farka Touré, the Tuareg band Tinariwen, Khaira Arby, and several Afro-pop artists such as Salif Keita, the duo Amadou et Mariam, Oumou Sangare, Fatoumata Diawara, Rokia Traore, and Habib Koité. Dance also plays a large role in Malian culture. Dance parties are common events among friends, and traditional mask dances are performed at ceremonial events.

Literature
Though Mali's literature is less famous than its music, Mali has always been one of Africa's liveliest intellectual centers. Mali's literary tradition is passed mainly by word of mouth, with jalis reciting or singing histories and stories known by heart. Amadou Hampâté Bâ, Mali's best-known historian, spent much of his life writing these oral traditions down for the world to remember.
The best-known novel by a Malian writer is Yambo Ouologuem's Le devoir de violence, which won the 1968 Prix Renaudot but whose legacy was marred by accusations of plagiarism. Other well-known Malian writers include Baba Traoré, Modibo Sounkalo Keita, Massa Makan Diabaté, Moussa Konaté, and Fily Dabo Sissoko.

Sport
The most popular sport in Mali is association football, which became more prominent after Mali hosted the 2002 African Cup of Nations. Most towns and cities have regular games; the most popular teams nationally are Djoliba AC, Stade Malien, and Real Bamako, all based in the capital. Informal games are often played by youths using a bundle of rags as a ball.
Basketball is another major sport; the Mali women's national basketball team, led by Hamchetou Maiga, competed at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Traditional wrestling (la lutte) is also somewhat common, though popularity has declined in recent years. The game wari, a mancala variant, is a common pastime.
Mali featured a men's national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup.

Cuisine
Rice and millet are the staples of Malian cuisine, which is heavily based on cereal grains. Grains are generally prepared with sauces made from edible leaves, such as spinach or baobab, with tomato peanut sauce, and may be accompanied by pieces of grilled meat (typically chicken, mutton, beef, or goat). Malian cuisine varies regionally. Other popular dishes include fufu, jollof rice, and maafe.

Media
In Mali, there are several newspapers such as Les Echos, L'Essor, Info Matin, Nouvel Horizon, and Le Républicain. Office de Radiodiffusion-Télévision du Mali is the state-owned service. Telecommunications in Mali include 869,600 mobile phones, 45,000 televisions and 414,985 Internet users.

See also
Outline of Mali

Notes
References
Bibliography
External links
Key Development Forecasts for Mali from International Futures

Government
Presidency – official website of the president of Mali
Prime Minister – official website of the prime minister of Mali
National Assembly – official website of the National Assembly of Mali
Statistics – official website of National Institute of Statistics

History
"History" – Malian History at Embassy of the Republic of Mali in Berlin

Tourism
Mali Tourisme – Mali's official tourism portal

Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Mali
 Geographic data related to Mali at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Mali
Tourism in Mali is not well developed. Due to issues with their infrastructure, tourism had been slow to grow but had seen improvements prior to the 2002 Africa Cup of Nations. However, due to the Northern Mali conflict and threats from terrorism, all major tour operators have withdrawn services which saw a decrease in tourists from 200,000 in 2011 to 10,000 the following year. The nation has four UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including Timbuktu.

Overview
Development of the tourist industry was hindered by the country's inadequate transport infrastructure and a shortage of hotels for visitors. Mali hosted the Africa Cup of Nations soccer tournament in 2002. In preparation for this event, the government implemented a social development programme called "Mali 2002". The tourist industry benefited from this programme. However, since then, ongoing conflicts have caused tourism to dwindle due to the ongoing risks of attacks against foreign nationals.
In the early 2000s, around 90,000 tourists visited Mali each year. This had increased to 200,000 by 2011, but following attacks against tourists and the withdrawal by tour operators, this decreased to 10,000 in the following year.

Warnings against tourism
Since 2012, the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office recommends against all but essential travel to several areas of the country, and a complete ban on travel to others. While this does not mean that travellers from the UK cannot travel there, they would have to do so independently and without insurance. There are no direct flights to Mali from the United Kingdom, nor do any major British tour operators offer travel to the country. It describes the situation in Mali as "still unstable and there is a high threat from terrorism, attacks could be indiscriminate, including in places frequented by expatriates and foreign travellers.", and highlights potential retaliation against Western tourists following the 2013 intervention by France in the Northern Mali conflict.

Attractions
The National Museum of Mali in Bamako houses an extensive collection of Malian art, artifacts, and cultural exhibits.

Festivals
The country had been noted for its festivals, especially the Festival au Désert which had been held since 2001 but was put on hold in 2013 because of the security issues.

UNESCO World Heritage Sites
Mali has four UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the well known city of Timbuktu. This has been on the UNESCO danger list since 2012, which the organisation describes as "an intellectual and spiritual capital and a centre for the propagation of Islam throughout Africa in the 15th and 16th centuries, its three great mosques, Djingareyber, Sankore and Sidi Yahia, recall Timbuktu's golden age. Although continuously restored, these monuments are today under threat from desertification." The other three include Bandiagara Escarpment, Djenné and the Tomb of Askia.

Visitor statistics
Most visitors arriving to Mali for tourism purposes were from the following countries of nationality:

References


== External links ==

## Culture of Mali
The culture of Mali is shaped by its shared history as a colonial and post-colonial nation, along with the interactions between the many ethnic groups that make up its people. What is now the nation of Mali was first unified during the medieval period under the Mali Empire. Although the modern state does not include some areas in the southwest and extends further east and northeast, the dominant role of the Mandé people, who gave their name to the empire, remains a key aspect of Mali’s identity today. 
Songhay, Bozo, and Dogon people predominate, while the Fula people, formerly nomadic, have settled in various parts of the nation. Tuareg and Maure people continue to practice a largely nomadic desert culture in the north. The interaction of these communities (along with dozens of other smaller ethnicities) has given rise to a Malian culture marked by both heterogeneity and the blending of traditions.

Ethnic patchwork and intermixing
Mande people share a caste system in which certain skills (metalworking, fishing, history-keeping) are passed down through families. The rituals and cultural associations of these activities have spread far beyond the Mande communities themselves.
While the Malinké - Dyula, and Bambara people form a Mande core (at around 50%) of Malian culture in the densely populated regions of the south and east, a mosaic of other cultures also contribute to Malian society.
The Fula people, originally nomadic but now as often village and city dwelling, are scattered in communities across the nation as they are over much of West Africa. Fula peoples were amongst the first and most fervent believers in Islam, which orders the lives of the vast majority of Malians. The Fula traditions of nomadic cattle herding has bequeathed values of mobility and independence, and at the same time created networks of mutual dependence between certain communities and cultures.  The Fula transhumance cycle meant that entire Fula tribes would spend seasons living in Bambara communities, creating formalized relationships called Cousinage. This survives to this day as the Malian cultural institution known as sanankuya, or the "joking relationship".  In Mali, the state of Macina, in the midst of the Inner Niger Delta was dominated by Fula people and culture.
Dogon and Songhay people are dominant in the east of the country, with the Songhay Empire pushing traditionally animist Dogon deep into the isolating hill country of the southeast.  Here the Dogon have maintained a unique culture, art, and lifestyle which has become a source of pride for all Malians.
All along the edge of the Sahara, and far into the dry land of isolated oases live the nomadic Berber Tuareg and the (in the northwest) Maures (or Moors), of Arab-o-Berber origins. While making up only 10% of the population, these groups bring a distinct culture to modern Mali.

Music
Malian musical traditions are often derived from Mande griots or jalis, a family-based caste of performing poets. While today, griots are often seen as praise singers at local weddings or civic events, where historically they served as court historians, advisors, and diplomats.
The music of Mali is best known outside of Africa for the kora virtuosos Toumani Diabaté and Ballaké Sissoko, the late roots and blues guitarist Ali Farka Touré, and his sucessors Afel Bocoum and Vieux Farka Touré, the Tuareg band Tinariwen, and several Afro-pop artists such as Salif Keita, the duo Amadou et Mariam, and Oumou Sangaré.

Literature
Though Mali's literature is less famous than its music, Mali has always been one of Africa's liveliest intellectual centers.  Mali's literary tradition is largely oral, with jalis reciting or singing histories and stories from memory.  Amadou Hampâté Bâ, Mali's best-known historian, spent much of his life recording the oral traditions of his own Fula teachers, as well as those of Bambara and other Mande neighbors.
The best-known novel by a Malian writer is Yambo Ouologuem's Le devoir de violence, which won the 1968 Prix Renaudot but whose legacy was marred by accusations of plagiarism.  It is a dark history of a loosely disguised Bambara Empire, focused on slavery, injustice and suffering.
Massa Makan Diabaté, a descendant of griots, is known in the Francophone world for his work on The Epic of Sundiata as well as his "Kouta trilogy," a series of realist novels loosely based on contemporary life in his hometown of Kita. Other well-known Malian writers include Baba Traoré, Modibo Sounkalo Keita, Maryse Condé (a native of the French Antilles, has made a career writing about the Bamabara people from whom she descends), Moussa Konaté, and Fily Dabo Sissoko. Ousmane Sembène, a Wolof Senegalese novelist, set half of his novel God's Bits of Wood in Bamako.

Media
Festivals, food, and clothing
The varied everyday culture of Malians reflects the country's ethnic and geographic diversity. Most Malians wear flowing, colorful robes called boubloveous, that are typical of West Africa. Malians frequently participate in traditional festivals, dances, and ceremonies.

Public holidays
Friday and Sunday are half days at most businesses, while Saturday is usually a day of rest. Friday afternoon is the time of Muslim weekly prayers, while the half day on the Christian sabbath is a tradition from the time of French colonial rule. Muslim, Christian, and National celebrations are marked as public holidays in Mali.

Christmas
Mainly a Muslim nation, Christmas is a public holiday celebrated by a significant proportion of Christians who make up less than 3% of the population. Some traditional festivities in big focus involve church services where worshippers spend over 30 hours in church during the Christmas period. They also speak different languages during services and every language group takes turn to sing a Christmas carol.

Food
Rice and millet are the staples of Malian cuisine, which is heavily based on cereal grains. Grains are generally prepared with sauces made from a variety of edible leaves, such as spinach or baobab, with tomato peanut sauce, and may be accompanied by pieces of grilled meat (typically chicken, mutton, beef, pork, or goat).
Malian cuisine varies regionally. Other popular dishes include fufu, jollof rice, and maafe.
New ways of promoting Malian gastronomy are emerging through activities such as the "DIBI festival". Which is a gastronomic, artistic and cultural meeting in Bamako, which is held over 3 days with good "Dibi" and show for a pleasant moment.

Textiles
Bògòlanfini ("mud cloth"), a handmade cotton fabric, traditionally dyed with fermented mud, has an important place in traditional Malian culture, and has more recently, become a symbol of Malian cultural identity. The cloth is being exported worldwide for use in fashion, fine art, and decoration.

Sports
Football is the most popular sport in Mali. Mali's national team became more prominent, after hosting the 2002 African Cup of Nations but has never qualified for the World Cup despite making it to the final round of the 2018 World Cup Qualifiers. Most towns and cities have regular games; the most popular national teams are Djoliba, Stad, and Real. Informal games are often played by youths, using a bundle of rags as a ball.
Mali has produced several notable players namely Seydou Keita, Adama Traore, and Moussa Marega Basketball is another major sport; the Mali women's national basketball team is the only African basketball team that competed at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Traditional wrestling (la lutte) is also somewhat common, though its popularity has declined in recent years. The game wari, a mancala variant, is a common pastime.

See also
Architecture of Mali
National Museum of Mali

References
Works cited
DiPiazza, Francesca Davis. Mali in Pictures. Twenty-First Century Books (2007). ISBN 0-8225-6591-9.
Hudgens, Jim, Richard Trillo, and Nathalie Calonnec. The Rough Guide to West Africa. Rough Guides (2003). ISBN 1-84353-118-6.
(in French) Milet, Eric & Jean-Luc Manaud. Mali. Editions Olizane (2007). ISBN 2-88086-351-1.
Pye-Smith, Charlie & Rhéal Drisdelle. Mali: A Prospect of Peace? Oxfam (1997). ISBN 0-85598-334-5.
Velton, Ross. Mali. Bradt Travel Guides (2004). ISBN 1-84162-077-7.

Further reading
Ba, Amadoue Hampate (2002). Il n'y a pas de petites querelles : nouveaux contes de la savane (in French). Paris: Presse Pocket.

External links
Mali Culture (in French)
Archive of Malian Photography

## Cuisine of Mali
Cuisine in Mali includes rice and millet as staples of Mali, a food culture heavily based on cereal grains. Grains are generally prepared with sauces made from edible leaves, such as spinach, sweet potato or baobab, with tomato peanut sauce. The dishes may be accompanied by pieces of grilled meat (typically chicken, mutton, beef, or goat).
Malian cuisine varies regionally. Part of West African cuisine, other popular dishes in Mali include  fufu, Dibi, Jollof rice, and maafe (peanut butter sauce). The National dish is Tiguadege Na, a creamy peanut stew with various meats like beef, chicken or meatballs.

Breakfast
Common Malian breakfasts usually consist of Millet-based porridges, various breads, and sweet and sugary teas. Common morning staples include: 

Fonde/monoo: a Malian millet porridge that is also commonly eaten in Senegal.
Maasa: traditional deep-fried pancakes or flatbread made with rice or millet.
Malian bread: Breads like baguette are commonly eaten in Mali with butter or cheese.

Lunch
Lunch in Mali is considered the most substantial meal, people usually eat traditional curries(sauces) made with peanuts, okra or baobab leaves. Other dishes like Yassa are also popular in this region. Some common staples for lunch in Mali are:

Tigadeguena/Domoda: a creamy peanut stew made with various meats.
Rice and meat is also popular. Along with applesauce, cheese, and peas

Miscellanous
Foutou: porridge made with cassava
Salade à la Tomate et au Concombres: a traditional tomato and cucumber salad.
Poulet Kedjennou: a chicken stew that is eaten with vegetables
Poulet Yassa: a famous Senegalese dish that is also very commonly eaten in parts and regions of Mali, it consists of many different things like lemon, onion and more.
Diabadji: Meat in onion sauce
Fakoye: Lamb in herb sauce
Naboulou: Meat and baobab leaves in peanut sauce
N’gougouna: Meat in bean leaf sauce
Saga Saga: Meat in sweet potato leaf sauce
Sauce d’Arachide: Meat in peanut sauce
Sauce Noire: Meat in gumbo sauce
Mango: tropical fruit grown across the world, and is very popular in Mali.

References
Bibliography
Milet, Eric & Manaud, Jean-Luc (2007). Mali (in French). Editions Olizane. ISBN 978-2-88086-351-7.
Velton, Ross (2004). Mali. Bradt Travel Guides. ISBN 978-1-84162-077-0.

## List of museums in Mali
This is a list of museums in Mali.

List
National Museum of Mali (Musée National du Mali)
Muso Kunda Museum of Women (Musée de la Femme)
Musee de site de Djenné
Musée Dogon de Fombori "Banque Culturelle"
Musée du Sahel
Musée Munincipal de Tombouctou

See also
List of museums

External links
Museums in Mali (Archived December 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine)