--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for South Africa
FILE_NAME: country_south_africa.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:50:23
----------------

# South Africa

## General Overview
South Africa, officially the Republic of South Africa (RSA), is the southernmost country in Africa. Its nine provinces are bounded to the south by 2,798 kilometres (1,739 miles) of coastline that stretches along the South Atlantic, and Indian Ocean; to the north by the neighbouring countries of Namibia, Botswana, and Zimbabwe 
to the east and northeast by Mozambique, and Eswatini, and it encloses Lesotho. Covering an area of 1,221,037 square kilometres (471,445 square miles), the country has a population of over 63 million people, making it the sixth-most populated country in Africa.
The Republic of South Africa was established on May 31, 1961 by the Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain, the senate and house of assembly of the Union of South Africa through the Republic of South Africa Act.
It construed the powers of the Crown and monarch of South Africa to the office of State President.
Pretoria is the administrative capital, while Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital, and Bloemfontein is regarded as the judicial capital. The largest and most populous city is Johannesburg, followed by Cape Town and Durban.
Archaeological findings suggest that various hominid species existed in South Africa about 2.5 million years ago, and modern humans inhabited the region over 100,000 years ago. The first known people were the indigenous Khoisan, and Bantu-speaking peoples, who migrated in waves, from west and central Africa to the region 2,000 to 1,000 years ago. In the north, the Kingdom of Mapungubwe formed in the 13th century, and the Venda Kingdom in the 17th century. In 1652, the Dutch established the first European settlement at Table Bay, Dutch Cape Colony. Its invasion in 1795, and the Battle of Blaauwberg in 1806 led to British occupation. The Mfecane, a period of significant upheaval, led to the formation of various African kingdoms, including the Zulu Kingdom. The region was further colonised, and the Mineral Revolution saw a shift towards industrialisation and urbanisation. Following the Second Boer War, the Union of South Africa was created in 1910 after the amalgamation of the Cape, Natal, Transvaal, and Orange River colonies, becoming a republic after the 1961 referendum. The multi-racial Cape Qualified Franchise in the Cape was gradually eroded, and the vast majority of Black South Africans were not enfranchised until 1994.
The National Party imposed apartheid in 1948, institutionalising previous racial segregation. After a struggle by the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid activists, both inside and outside the country, the repeal of discriminatory laws began in the mid-1980s. Universal elections took place in 1994, following which all racial groups have held political representation in the country's liberal democracy, which comprises a parliamentary republic and nine provinces. Recognised as a middle power in international affairs, South Africa maintains significant regional influence and is a member of BRICS+, the African Union (hosting the seat of the Pan-African Parliament), SADC, SACU, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the G20.
A developing, and newly industrialised country, it has the largest economy in Africa by nominal GDP, is tied with Ethiopia for the most UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Africa, and is a biodiversity hotspot with unique biomes, plant, and animal life. South Africa encompasses a variety of cultures, languages, and religions, and has been called the "rainbow nation", especially in the wake of apartheid, to describe its diversity. Since the end of apartheid, government accountability and quality of life have substantially improved for non-white citizens. However, crime, violence, poverty, and inequality remain widespread, with about 32% of the population unemployed as of 2024, while some 56% lived below the poverty line in 2014. Having the highest Gini coefficient of 0.67, South Africa is considered one of the most economically unequal countries in the world.

Etymology
The name "South Africa" is derived from the country's geographic location at the southern tip of Africa. Upon formation, the country was named the Union of South Africa in English and Unie van Zuid-Afrika in Dutch, reflecting its origin from the unification of four British colonies. Since 1961, the long formal name in English has been the "Republic of South Africa" and Republiek van Suid-Afrika in Afrikaans. The country has an official name in 12 official languages.
 Mzansi, derived from the Xhosa noun uMzantsi meaning "south", is a colloquial name for South Africa, while some Pan-Africanist political parties prefer the term "Azania", which is a word originating from Greek, and not an African language.

History
Prehistory
South Africa contains some of the oldest archaeological and human-fossil sites in the world. Archaeologists have recovered extensive fossil remains from a series of caves in Gauteng known as the Cradle of Humankind, which has been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The sites include Sterkfontein, one of the richest sites for hominin fossils in the world, as well as Swartkrans, Gondolin Cave, Kromdraai, Cooper's Cave and Malapa. The first hominin fossil discovered in Africa, the Taung Child, was found near Taung in 1924. Other hominin remains have come from the sites of Makapansgat in Limpopo; Cornelia and Florisbad in the Free State; Border Cave in KwaZulu-Natal; Klasies River Caves in the Eastern Cape; and Pinnacle Point, Elandsfontein and Die Kelders Cave in the Western Cape.
These finds suggest that various hominid species existed in South Africa from about three million years ago, starting with Australopithecus africanus, followed by Australopithecus sediba, Homo ergaster, Homo erectus, Homo rhodesiensis, Homo helmei, Homo naledi and modern humans (Homo sapiens). Modern humans have inhabited Southern Africa for at least 170,000 years. Various researchers have located pebble tools within the Vaal River valley.

Pre-colonial period
The indigenous San and Khoikhoi peoples of Southern Africa were predominantly hunter-gatherers and, in the case of the Khoikhoi, also practised pastoralism. Khoisan peoples may be the descendants of an early dispersal of anatomically modern humans to Southern Africa before 150,000 years ago. They were largely displaced or absorbed by the Bantu expansion which took place between 1,500 and 2,000 years ago.

Bantu settlers expanded from West Africa from approximately 3,000 BCE. Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples, who were iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen, were present south of the Limpopo River (now the northern border with Botswana and Zimbabwe) by the 4th or 5th century. The earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the Khoisan languages, and who eventually reached the Great Fish River in the present-day Eastern Cape. As they migrated, these larger Iron Age populations displaced or assimilated earlier peoples. In Mpumalanga, several stone circles have been found along with a stone arrangement that has been named Adam's Calendar, and the ruins are thought to be created by the Bakone, a Northern Sotho group.
Around 1220, in the Limpopo-Shashe Basin, the elite of K2 moved to settle the flat-topped summit of Mapungubwe Hill, with the population settling below. Rainmaking was crucial to the development of sacral kingship, and several rainmaking sites have been found nearby including Ratho Kroonkop. By 1250, the capital of the Mapungubwe Kingdom had a population of 5,000 and the state covered 30,000 km2 (11,500 square miles), growing wealthy through the Indian Ocean trade. The events around Mapungubwe's collapse circa 1300 are unknown; however, trade routes shifted north from the Limpopo to the Zambezi, precipitating the rise of Great Zimbabwe. The hill was abandoned and Mapungubwe's population scattered.
In the Soutpansberg, interactions between early Shona inhabitants (possible from Mapungubwe), late-comer Shona and Sotho-speakers between the 15th and 17th centuries culminated in the formation of the Venda language and identity. In the late-17th century, a splinter group from the dynasty of the Rozvi Empire migrated south; they were the Singo. The Singo settled at Dzata, which became the capital of the Venda Kingdom, and came to subdue all of the Soutpansberg. In the late-18th century, following trade routes moving south, the state collapsed. The most powerful dynasties that remained were the Ramabulana Singo in the western Soutpansberg, and the Tshivhase Singo and Mphaphuli Singo in the eastern Soutpansberg.

Portuguese exploration
In 1487, the Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias led the first European voyage to land in southern Africa. On 4 December, he landed at Walfisch Bay (now known as Walvis Bay in present-day Namibia). This was south of the furthest point reached in 1485 by his predecessor, the Portuguese navigator Diogo Cão, being Cape Cross, north of the bay. Dias continued down the western coast of southern Africa. After 8 January 1488, prevented by storms from proceeding along the coast, he sailed out of sight of land and passed the southernmost point of Africa without seeing it. He reached as far up the eastern coast of Africa as, what he called, Rio do Infante, probably the present-day Groot River, in May 1488. On his return, he saw the cape, which he named Cabo das Tormentas ('Cape of Storms'). King John II renamed the point Cabo da Boa Esperança, or Cape of Good Hope, as it led to the riches of the East Indies. Dias' feat of navigation was immortalised in Luís de Camões' 1572 epic poem, Os Lusíadas.
In 1497 Vasco Da Gama set sail from Lisbon and became the first European to reach India in 1498 via the Cape of Good Hope, opening up oceanic trade between Europe and Asia. He bypassed the coast of present-day South Africa and made landfall in present-day Mozambique.

Dutch and British colonisation of the Cape
The Dutch first made contact with the coast of Southern Africa in 1595. With Portuguese maritime power declining in the early 17th century, English and Dutch merchants competed to dislodge Portugal's lucrative monopoly on the spice trade. British East India Company representatives sporadically called at the Cape in search of provisions from as early as 1601 but later came to favour Ascension Island and Saint Helena as ports of refuge. Dutch interest was aroused after 1647, when two employees of the Dutch East India Company were shipwrecked at the Cape for several months, and managed to survive by obtaining fresh water and meat from the indigenous peoples, and sowing crops in the fertile soil. Upon their return to Holland, they reported favourably on the Cape's potential as a "warehouse and garden" for provisions to stock passing ships for long voyages.

In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape Route, Jan van Riebeeck established a victualling station at the Cape of Good Hope, at what would become Cape Town, on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. In time, the Cape became home to a large population of Free Burghers. Dutch traders also brought thousands of enslaved people to the fledgling colony from present-day Indonesia, Madagascar, and eastern Africa. Some of the earliest mixed race communities in the country were formed between Free Burghers, enslaved people, and indigenous peoples. This led to the development of a new ethnic group, the Cape Coloureds, most of whom adopted the Dutch language and Christian faith. Conflicts over resources between the indigenous Khoisan people and Dutch settlers began in the 17th century and continued for centuries.
Dutch colonists' eastward expansion caused wars with the southwesterly migrating Xhosa nation, as both sides competed for the pastureland near the Great Fish River, which the colonists desired for grazing cattle. Free Burghers who became independent farmers on the frontier were known as Boers, with some (the trekboers) adopting semi-nomadic lifestyles. The Boers formed loose militias, which they termed commandos, and forged alliances with Khoisan peoples to repel Xhosa raids. Both sides launched bloody but inconclusive offensives, and sporadic violence, often accompanied by livestock theft, remained common for several decades.

Great Britain occupied Cape Town between 1795 and 1803 to prevent it from falling under the control of the French First Republic, which had invaded the Low Countries. After briefly returning to Dutch rule under the Batavian Republic in 1803, the Cape was occupied again by the British in 1806. Following the end of the Napoleonic Wars, it was formally ceded to Great Britain and became an integral part of the British Empire. British emigration to South Africa began around 1818, culminating in the arrival of the 1820 Settlers, the purpose of which was primarily to increase the size of the European workforce and bolster frontier regions against Xhosa incursions.

Mfecane and colonial expansion
In the early 1800s, the Mfecane (lit. 'crushing') saw a heightened period of conflict, migration, and state formation among native groups, caused by the complex interplay of international trade, environmental instability, and European colonisation. Chiefdoms grew wealthier and competed over trade routes and grazing land, leading to the formation of the Ndwandwe and Mthethwa Paramountcies in the east of the country. Ndwandwe defeated Mthethwa, which in turn split into several groups, one of which was led by Shaka of the amaZulu. The 1810s saw the fourth and fifth Xhosa Wars as British colonisation expanded. The Ndwandwe Paramountcy splintered amid costly raids, and Shaka's Zulu Kingdom rose to fill the power vacuum. The Gaza Empire concurrently formed, and while the Zulu managed to totally defeat the Ndwandwe, they were repelled by Gaza.

During the early 19th century, many Dutch settlers departed from the Cape Colony, where they had been subjected to British control, in a series of migrant groups who came to be known as Voortrekkers (lit. 'pathfinders'  or 'pioneers'). They migrated to the future Natal, Free State, and Transvaal regions, and following their victory over the Zulu Kingdom at the Battle of Blood River on 16 December 1838, founded the Boer republics: the Natalia Republic, the South African Republic and the Orange Free State. In the interior, the Cape Colony expanded at the expense of the Batswana and Griqua, and Boer expansion destabilised the middle Orange River region. The Matabele kingdom came to dominate the eastern interior, and raided the Venda kingdom.
The discovery of diamonds in 1867 and gold in 1884 in the interior initiated the Mineral Revolution, which increased economic growth and immigration and intensified British subjugation of the indigenous peoples. The struggle to control these important economic resources shaped relations between Europeans and the indigenous population, as well as between the Boers and the British.
On 16 May 1876, President Thomas François Burgers of the South African Republic declared war against the Pedi people. King Sekhukhune defeated the army on 1 August 1876, with another attack by the Lydenburg Volunteer Corps being similarly repulsed. On 16 February 1877, the two parties signed a peace treaty at Botshabelo. The Boers' inability to subdue the Pedi led to the departure of Burgers in favour of Paul Kruger and the British annexation of the South African Republic. In 1878 and 1879, three British attacks were successfully repelled until Garnet Wolseley defeated Sekhukhune in November 1879 with an army of 2,000 British soldiers, Boers and 10,000 Swazis.
The Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879 between the British and the Zulu Kingdom. Following Lord Carnarvon's successful introduction of federation in Canada, it was thought that similar political effort, coupled with military campaigns, might succeed with the African kingdoms, tribal areas and Boer republics in South Africa. In 1874, Henry Bartle Frere was sent to South Africa as the British High Commissioner to bring such plans into being. Among the obstacles were the presence of the independent states of the Boers, and the Zulu army. The Zulu nation defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana but ultimately lost the war, resulting in the termination of its independence.

Boer Wars and independence
The Boer republics successfully resisted British encroachments during the First Boer War (1880–1881) using guerrilla warfare tactics, which were well-suited to local conditions. The British returned with greater numbers, more experience, and new strategy in the Second Boer War (1899–1902) and, although suffering heavy casualties due to Boer attrition warfare, were ultimately successful due in part to scorched earth tactics and concentration camps, in which 27,000 Boer civilians died due to a combination of disease and neglect. South Africa's urban population grew rapidly from the end of the 19th century onward. After the devastation of the wars, Boer farmers fled into Transvaal and Orange Free State cities, many of whom would come to constitute an urban class of "poor whites".
Anti-British policies among white South Africans focused on independence. During the Dutch and British colonial years, racial segregation was mostly informal, though some legislation was enacted to control the settlement and movement of indigenous people, including the Native Location Act of 1879 and the system of pass laws.
Eight years after the end of the Second Boer War, and after four years of negotiation, the South Africa Act 1909 created the Union of South Africa on 31 May 1910, granting the country nominal independence. The union was a dominion that included the former territories of the Cape, Transvaal and Natal colonies, as well as the Orange Free State republic. The Natives Land Act of 1913, which was passed by the British ruling the Parliament of the newly formed Union of South Africa, severely restricted the ownership of land by black South Africans, who at that stage controlled only 7% of the country. The amount of land reserved for indigenous peoples was later marginally increased.
In 1931, the union became fully sovereign from the United Kingdom with the passage of the Statute of Westminster, which abolished the last powers of the Parliament of the United Kingdom to legislate in the country. In 1934, the South African Party and National Party merged to form the United Party, seeking reconciliation between Afrikaners and English-speaking whites. In 1939, the party split over the entry of the Union into World War II as an ally of the United Kingdom, a move which National Party followers opposed.

Apartheid era
In 1948, the National Party was elected to power. It strengthened the racial segregation begun under Dutch and British colonial rule. Taking Canada's Indian Act as a framework, the nationalist government classified all peoples into three races (being "Whites", "Blacks", and "Indians and Coloured people") and developed rights and limitations for each. The white-led minoritarian government instituted a policy of legally institutionalised segregation which came to be known as apartheid. While whites enjoyed a higher standard of living comparable to First World Western nations, the black majority remained disadvantaged by almost every standard, including income, education, housing, and life expectancy. The Freedom Charter, adopted in 1955 by the Congress Alliance, which was multi-racial in makeup, demanded a non-racial society and an end to discrimination.
On 31 May 1961, the country became a republic following a referendum (only open to white voters) which narrowly passed; the British-dominated Natal province largely voted against the proposal. Elizabeth II lost the title Queen of South Africa, and the last Governor-General, Charles Robberts Swart, became state president. As a concession to the Westminster system, the appointment of the president remained by parliament, and the position was virtually powerless until P. W. Botha's Constitution Act of 1983, which eliminated the office of prime minister and instated a unique "strong presidency" responsible to parliament. Pressured by other Commonwealth of Nations countries, South Africa withdrew from the organisation in 1961.
Despite opposition to apartheid both within and outside the country from all racial backgrounds, the government legislated for a continuation of apartheid. The security forces cracked down on internal dissent, and violence became widespread, with anti-apartheid organisations such as the African National Congress (ANC), the Azanian People's Organisation, and the Pan-Africanist Congress carrying out guerrilla warfare, urban sabotage and, according to Oxford Academic, acts of terrorism. The three rival resistance movements also engaged in occasional inter-factional clashes as they jockeyed for domestic influence. Apartheid became increasingly controversial, and several countries began to boycott business with the South African government because of its racial policies. The boycotts and restrictions were later extended to international sanctions and the divestment of holdings by foreign investors.

Post-apartheid
The Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith, signed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Harry Schwarz in 1974, enshrined the principles of peaceful transition of power and equality for all, the first of such agreements by black and white political leaders in South Africa. Ultimately, F.W. de Klerk opened bilateral discussions with Nelson Mandela in 1993 for a transition of policies and government.
In 1990, the National Party government took the first step towards dismantling apartheid when it lifted the ban on the ANC and other political organisations. It released Nelson Mandela from prison after 27 years of serving a sentence for sabotage and treason. A negotiation process followed. With approval from the white electorate in a 1992 referendum, the government continued negotiations to end apartheid. South Africa held its first universal elections in 1994, which the ANC won by an overwhelming majority. The country rejoined the Commonwealth of Nations and became a member of the Southern African Development Community.

The post-apartheid period, whilst plagued by high unemployment and increasing income inequality, has been characterised by relative political stability. The country has, however, seen periodic outbreaks of violence, most notably the 2008 xenophobic riots — during which over 60 people were killed, and an estimated 100,000 people were driven from their homes — and the Marikana massacre, which constituted the most lethal use of force by South African security forces against civilians since the Soweto uprising. Widespread political corruption and state capture took place under the presidency of Jacob Zuma, whose brief imprisonment for contempt of court during the course of his trial for corruption in 2021 led to widespread unrest which left 354 people dead.
The electoral dominance of the ANC has gradually declined since the early 2000s, with the party failing to secure a parliamentary majority for the first time in the 2024 general election. President Cyril Ramaphosa subsequently formed the Government of National Unity with, amongst others, the Democratic Alliance.

Geography
South Africa is in southern Africa, with a coastline that stretches more than 2,500 km (1,553 mi) and along two oceans — the South Atlantic and the Indian Ocean. At 1,219,912 km2 (471,011 sq mi) in area, South Africa is the 24th-largest country in the world. Excluding the Prince Edward Islands, the country lies between latitudes 22° and 35°S, and longitudes 16° and 33°E. The interior of South Africa consists of a large, and in most places almost flat, plateau with an altitude of between 1,000 m (3,300 ft) and 2,100 m (6,900 ft). It is highest in the east and slopes gently downwards towards the west and north, and slightly to the south and south-west. This plateau is surrounded by the Great Escarpment whose eastern, and highest, stretch is known as the Drakensberg. Mafadi in the Drakensberg is the highest peak in the country at 3,450 m (11,320 ft) above sea level. The KwaZulu-Natal–Lesotho international border is formed by the highest portion of the Great Escarpment which reaches an altitude of over 3,000 m (9,800 ft).
The south and south-western parts of the plateau (at approximately 1,100–1,800 m above sea level) and the adjoining plain below (at approximately 700–800 m above sea level – see map on the right) are together known as the Great Karoo, which consists of sparsely populated shrubland. To the north, the Great Karoo fades into the more arid Bushmanland, which eventually becomes the Kalahari Desert in the north-west of the country. The mid-eastern and highest part of the plateau is known as the Highveld. This relatively well-watered area is home to a great proportion of the country's commercial farmlands and contains its largest conurbation, Gauteng. To the north of the Highveld, from about the 25° 30' S line of latitude, the plateau slopes downwards into the Bushveld, which ultimately gives way to the Limpopo River lowlands, the Lowveld.
The coastal belt, below the Great Escarpment, moving clockwise from the northeast, consists of the Limpopo Lowveld, which merges into the Mpumalanga Lowveld, below the Mpumalanga Drakensberg (the eastern portion of the Great Escarpment). This is hotter, drier and less intensely cultivated than the Highveld above the escarpment. The Kruger National Park, located in the provinces of Limpopo and Mpumalanga in north-eastern South Africa, occupies a large portion of the Lowveld, covering 19,633 square kilometres (7,580 sq mi)

The coastal belt below the south and south-western stretches of the Great Escarpment contains several ranges of Cape Fold Mountains which run parallel to the coast, separating the Great Escarpment from the ocean. The land between the Outeniqua and Langeberg ranges to the south and the Swartberg range to the north is known as the Little Karoo, which consists of semi-desert shrubland similar to that of the Great Karoo, except that its northern strip along the foothills of the Swartberg Mountains has a somewhat higher rainfall and is, therefore, more cultivated than the Great Karoo.
The Little Karoo is famous for its ostrich farming around Oudtshoorn. The lowland area to the north of the Swartberg range up to the Great Escarpment is the lowland part of the Great Karoo, which is climatically and botanically almost indistinguishable from the Karoo above the Great Escarpment. The narrow coastal strip between the Outeniqua and Langeberg ranges and the ocean, known as the Garden Route, has a moderately high year-round rainfall, and hosts the most extensive area of forest in the country.
In the south-west corner of the country, the Cape Peninsula forms the southernmost tip of the coastal strip which borders the Atlantic Ocean and ultimately terminates at the country's border with Namibia at the Orange River. The Cape Peninsula has a Mediterranean climate, making it and its immediate surrounds the only portion of Sub-Saharan Africa which receives most of its rainfall in winter.
The coastal belt to the north of the Cape Peninsula is bounded on the west by the Atlantic Ocean and the first row of north–south running Cape Fold Mountains to the east. The Cape Fold Mountains peter out at about the 32° S line of latitude, after which the Great Escarpment bounds the coastal plain. The most southerly portion of this coastal belt is known as the Swartland and Malmesbury Plain, which is an important wheat-growing region, relying on winter rains. The region further north is known as Namaqualand, which becomes more arid near the Orange River. The little rain that falls tends to fall in winter, which results in one of the world's most spectacular displays of flowers carpeting huge stretches of veld in spring (August–September).
South Africa also has one offshore possession, the small sub-Antarctic archipelago of the Prince Edward Islands, consisting of Marion Island (290 km2 or 110 sq mi) and Prince Edward Island (45 km2 or 17 sq mi).

Climate
South Africa has a generally temperate climate because it is surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, because it is located in the climatically milder Southern Hemisphere, and because its average elevation rises steadily toward the north (toward the equator) and further inland. This varied topography and oceanic influence result in a great variety of climatic zones. The climatic zones range from the extreme desert of the southern Namib in the farthest northwest to the lush subtropical climate in the east along the border with Mozambique and the Indian Ocean. Winters in South Africa occur between June and August. The extreme southwest has a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean with wet winters and hot, dry summers, hosting the famous fynbos biome of shrubland and thicket. This area produces much of the wine in South Africa and is known for its wind, which blows intermittently almost all year. The severity of this wind made passing around the Cape of Good Hope particularly treacherous for sailors, causing many shipwrecks. Further east on the south coast, rainfall is distributed more evenly throughout the year, producing a green landscape. The annual rainfall increases south of the Lowveld, especially near the coast, which is subtropical. The Free State is particularly flat because it lies centrally on the high plateau. North of the Vaal River, the Highveld becomes better watered and does not experience subtropical extremes of heat. Johannesburg, in the centre of the Highveld, is at 1,740 m (5,709 ft) above sea level and receives an annual rainfall of 760 mm (29.9 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.
The coldest place on mainland South Africa is Buffelsfontein in the Eastern Cape, where a temperature of −20.1 °C (−4.2 °F) was recorded in 2013. The Prince Edward Islands have colder average annual temperatures, but Buffelsfontein has colder extremes. The deep interior of mainland South Africa has the hottest temperatures: a temperature of 51.7 °C (125.06 °F) was recorded in 1948 in the Northern Cape Kalahari near Upington, but this temperature is unofficial and was not recorded with standard equipment; the official highest temperature is 48.8 °C (119.84 °F) at Vioolsdrif in January 1993.
Climate change in South Africa is leading to increased temperatures and rainfall variability. Extreme weather events are becoming more prominent. This is a critical concern for South Africans as climate change will affect the overall status and wellbeing of the country, for example with regards to water resources. Speedy environmental changes are resulting in clear effects on the community and environmental level in different ways and aspects, starting with air quality, to temperature and weather patterns, reaching out to food security and disease burden. According to computer-generated climate modelling produced by the South African National Biodiversity Institute, parts of southern Africa will see an increase in temperature by about 1 °C (1.8 °F) along the coast to more than 4 °C (7.2 °F) in the already hot hinterland such as the Northern Cape in late spring and summertime by 2050. The Cape Floral Region is predicted to be hit very hard by climate change. Drought, increased intensity and frequency of fire, and climbing temperatures are expected to push many rare species towards extinction. South Africa has published two national climate change reports in 2011 and 2016. South Africa contributes considerable carbon dioxide emissions, being the 14th largest emitter of carbon dioxide, primarily from its heavy reliance on coal and oil for energy production. As part of its international commitments, South Africa has pledged to peak emissions between 2020 and 2025.

Biodiversity
South Africa signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 4 June 1994 and became a party to the convention on 2 November 1995. It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which was received by the convention on 7 June 2006. The country is ranked sixth out of the world's seventeen megadiverse countries. Ecotourism in South Africa has become more prevalent in recent years, as a possible method of maintaining and improving biodiversity.
Numerous mammals are found in the Bushveld including lions, African leopards, South African cheetahs, southern white rhinos, blue wildebeest, kudus, impalas, hyenas, hippopotamuses and South African giraffes. A significant extent of the Bushveld exists in the north-east including Kruger National Park and the Sabi Sand Game Reserve, as well as in the far north in the Waterberg Biosphere. South Africa houses many endemic species, among them the critically endangered riverine rabbit (Bunolagus monticullaris) in the Karoo.
Up to 1945, more than 4,900 species of fungi (including lichen-forming species) had been recorded. In 2006, the number of fungi in South Africa was estimated at 200,000 species but did not take into account fungi associated with insects. If correct, then the number of South African fungi dwarfs that of its plants. In at least some major South African ecosystems, an exceptionally high percentage of fungi are highly specific in terms of the plants with which they occur. The country's Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan does not mention fungi (including lichen-forming fungi).
With more than 22,000 different vascular plants, or about 9% of all the known species of plants on Earth, South Africa is particularly rich in plant diversity. The most prevalent biome is the grassland, particularly on the Highveld, where the plant cover is dominated by different grasses, low shrubs, and acacia, mainly camel-thorn (Vachellia erioloba). Vegetation is sparse towards the north-west because of low rainfall. There are numerous species of water-storing succulents, like aloes and euphorbias, in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. And according to the World Wildlife Fund, South Africa is home to around a third of all succulent species. The grass and thorn savanna turns slowly into a bush savanna towards the north-east of the country, with denser growth. There are significant numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.
The fynbos biome, which makes up the majority of the area and plant life in the Cape Floristic Region, is located in a small region of the Western Cape and contains more than 9,000 of those species, or three times more plant species than found in the Amazon rainforest, making it among the richest regions on Earth in terms of plant diversity. Most of the plants are evergreen hard-leaf plants with fine, needle-like leaves, such as the sclerophyllous plants. Another uniquely South African flowering plant group is the genus Protea, with around 130 different species. While South Africa has a great wealth of flowering plants, only 1% of the land is forest, almost exclusively in the humid coastal plain of KwaZulu-Natal, where there are also areas of Southern Africa mangroves in river mouths. Even smaller reserves of forests are out of the reach of fire, known as montane forests. Plantations of imported tree species are predominant, particularly the non-native eucalyptus and pine.
South Africa has lost a large area of natural habitat in the last four decades, primarily because of overpopulation, sprawling development patterns, and deforestation during the 19th century. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.94/10, ranking it 112th globally out of 172 countries. South Africa is one of the worst affected countries in the world when it comes to invasion by alien species with many (e.g., black wattle, Port Jackson willow, Hakea, Lantana and Jacaranda) posing a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources. Also, woody plant encroachment of native plants in grasslands poses a threat to biodiversity and related ecosystem services, affecting over 7 million hectares. The original temperate forest found by the first European settlers was exploited until only small patches remained. Currently, South African hardwood trees like real yellowwood (Podocarpus latifolius), stinkwood (Ocotea bullata), and South African black ironwood (Olea capensis) are under strict government protection. Statistics from the Department of Environmental Affairs show a record 1,215 rhinos were killed in 2014. Since South Africa is home to a third of all succulent species (many endemic to the Karoo), it makes it a hotspot for plant poaching, leading to many species to be threatened with extinction.

Government and politics
South Africa is a parliamentary republic, but unlike most such republics, the president is both head of state and head of government and depends for their tenure on the confidence of Parliament. The executive, legislature, and judiciary are all subject to the supremacy of the Constitution of South Africa, and the superior courts have the power to strike down executive actions and acts of Parliament if they are unconstitutional. The National Assembly, the lower house of Parliament, consists of 400 members and is elected every five years by a system of party-list proportional representation. The National Council of Provinces, the upper house, consists of ninety members, with each of the nine provincial legislatures electing ten members.
After each parliamentary election, the National Assembly elects one of its members as president; hence the president serves a term of office the same as that of the Assembly, normally five years. No president may serve more than two terms in office. The president appoints a deputy president and ministers (each representing a department) who form the cabinet. The National Assembly may remove the president and the cabinet by a motion of no confidence. In the most recent election, held on 29 May 2024, the ANC lost its majority for the first time since the end of Apartheid, winning only 40% of the vote and 159 seats, while the main opposition, the Democratic Alliance (DA), won 22% of the vote and 87 seats. uMkhonto weSizwe, a new party founded by former President and ANC leader Jacob Zuma, won 14.6% of the vote and 58 seats, while the Economic Freedom Fighters, founded by Julius Malema, former president of the ANC Youth League who was later expelled from the ANC, won 9.5% of the vote and 39 seats. After the election, the ANC formed a Government of National Unity with the DA and several smaller parties.
South Africa has no legally defined capital city. The fourth chapter of the constitution states "The seat of Parliament is Cape Town, but an Act of Parliament enacted in accordance with section 76(1) and (5) may determine that the seat of Parliament is elsewhere." The country's three branches of government are split over different cities. Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital; Pretoria, as the seat of the president and cabinet, is the administrative capital; and Bloemfontein is the seat of the Supreme Court of Appeal, and is regarded as the judicial capital; although the highest court, the Constitutional Court of South Africa has been based in Johannesburg since 1994. Most foreign embassies are located in Pretoria.
Since 2004, South Africa has had many thousands of popular protests, some violent, making it, according to one academic, the "most protest-rich country in the world". There have been numerous incidents of political repression as well as threats of future repression in violation of the constitution, leading some analysts and civil society organisations to conclude that there is or could be a new climate of political repression.
In 2022, South Africa was placed sixth out of 48 sub-Saharan African countries on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance. South Africa scored well in the categories of Rule of Law, Transparency, Corruption, Participation and Human Rights, but scored low in Safety and Security. In 2006, South Africa became one of the first jurisdictions in the world to legalise same-sex marriage.
The Constitution of South Africa is the supreme rule of law in the country. The primary sources of South African law are Roman-Dutch mercantile law and personal law and English Common law, as imports of Dutch settlements and British colonialism. The first European-based law in South Africa was brought by the Dutch East India Company and is called Roman-Dutch law. It was imported before the codification of European law into the Napoleonic Code and is comparable in many ways to Scots law. This was followed in the 19th century by English law, both common and statutory. After unification in 1910, South Africa had its own parliament which passed laws specific for South Africa, building on those previously passed for the individual member colonies. The judicial system consists of the magistrates' courts, which hear lesser criminal cases and smaller civil cases; the High Court, which has divisions that serve as the courts of general jurisdiction for specific areas; the Supreme Court of Appeal; and the Constitutional Court, which is the highest court.

Administrative divisions
Each of the nine provinces is governed by a unicameral legislature, which is elected every five years by party-list proportional representation. The legislature elects a premier as head of government, and the premier appoints an Executive Council as a provincial cabinet. The powers of provincial governments are limited to topics listed in the constitution; these topics include such fields as health, education, public housing and transport.
The provinces are in turn divided into 52 districts: eight metropolitan and 44 district municipalities. The district municipalities are further subdivided into 205 local municipalities. The metropolitan municipalities, which govern the largest urban agglomerations, perform the functions of both district and local municipalities.

Foreign relations
As the Union of South Africa, the country is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), with Prime Minister Jan Smuts writing the preamble to the UN Charter. South Africa is one of the founding members of the African Union (AU) and has the largest economy of all the members. It is a founding member of the AU's New Partnership for Africa's Development. After apartheid ended, South Africa was readmitted to the Commonwealth of Nations. The country is a member of the Group of 77 and chaired the organisation in 2006. South Africa is also a member of the Southern African Development Community, South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone, Southern African Customs Union, Antarctic Treaty System, World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund, G20, G8+5, and the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa.
South Africa has played a key role as a mediator in African conflicts over the last decade, such as in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Comoros, Mozambique and Zimbabwe.
President Jacob Zuma and Chinese President Hu Jintao upgraded bilateral ties between the two countries in 2010 when they signed the Beijing Agreement which elevated South Africa's earlier "strategic partnership" with China to the higher level of "comprehensive strategic partnership" in both economic and political affairs, including the strengthening of exchanges between their respective ruling parties and legislatures. In 2011, South Africa joined the Brazil-Russia-India-China (BRICS) grouping of countries, identified by Zuma as the country's largest trading partners and also the largest trading partners with Africa as a whole. Zuma asserted that BRICS member countries would also work with each other through the UN, G20, and the India, Brazil South Africa (IBSA) forum.

Military
The South African National Defence Force (SANDF) serves as the unified armed forces of South Africa. Established in 1994, it was formed as a voluntary military through the integration of the former South African Defence Force (SADF) and several liberation movement forces. The SANDF is organised into four branches: the South African Army, the South African Air Force, the South African Navy, and the South African Military Health Service. As of 2025, the force comprises nearly 100,000 personnel, of whom around 75,000 are active professional soldiers, and operates under the authority of the president of South Africa, who serves as commander-in-chief. The SANDF emerged as a prominent African peacekeeping force in the early 2000s, deploying as a leading contributor to United Nations and African Union missions in Burundi (2001), Sudan (2004) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2003). It has since participated in regional security operations in countries including Lesotho and Mozambique, while continuing to contribute to multinational United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the Force Intervention Brigade.
Supporting these armed forces is a domestic defence industry that is the most advanced in Africa and one of the world's leading defence industrial bases outside the major military powers. Coordinated by the state-owned Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Armscor), it includes major companies such as Denel, Paramount Group, and Milkor. The industry produces a wide range of advanced systems, including armoured vehicles, military aircraft, naval vessels, and missiles, with about 80% of SANDF equipment made in South Africa. The country also remains a significant arms exporter and maintains self-sufficiency in most conventional military technologies.
South Africa is the only African nation to have successfully developed nuclear weapons. Between 1980 and 1990, six operational nuclear devices were covertly assembled before the arsenal was voluntarily dismantled in 1991, making South Africa the first country to relinquish its nuclear capability. The country is also alleged to have conducted a nuclear test over the Atlantic in 1979, known as the "Vela incident", although this is officially denied; then-President F.W. de Klerk later asserted that South Africa had "never conducted a clandestine nuclear test". Despite dismantling its arsenal, South Africa still has the technical capability to restart its weapons of mass destruction programme if it ever chose to do so, as its Pelindaba Nuclear Research Centre still stores enriched uranium from the former programme. However, this material is now used primarily for civilian nuclear research and medical isotope production, reflecting South Africa's commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. South Africa remains a strong advocate of nuclear disarmament, having ratified the UN Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 2019.

Law enforcement and crime
Law enforcement in South Africa is primarily the responsibility of the South African Police Service (SAPS), the national police force operating more than 1,150 police stations and employing around 150,950 officers. The SAPS is tasked with crime prevention, investigation, and national security. It also maintains an elite tactical unit, the Special Task Force (STF), which specialises in counter-terrorism, counter-insurgency, and hostage rescue operations. In the 2023 International SWAT Competition, the STF ranked 9th out of 55 international law enforcement teams, making it the highest-ranked African police unit and one of the world's best. Alongside formal policing, South Africa has the world's largest private security industry, comprising over 10,000 companies and more than 2.5 million registered personnel, exceeding the combined size of both the police and the military.
South Africa continues to experience high levels of violent crime, among the highest in the world and it leads Africa in this regard. From April 2017 to March 2018, an average of 57 murders per day were recorded, with a homicide rate more than five times the global average. Serious crimes such as armed robbery, hijackings, cash-in-transit heists, gang-related killings, and sexual violence are common. South Africa also records one of the world's highest reported rates of rape, with tens of thousands of cases each year, though many go unreported. Between 1994 and 2019, more than 526,000 murders were reported nationwide. Gang violence remains a major driver of the homicide rate, particularly in the Cape Flats region of Cape Town, where rival groups compete over territory, drug trafficking routes, and extortion. These conflicts often result in civilian casualties, with bystanders and children frequently caught in the crossfire.
Despite ongoing reforms, South Africa's criminal justice system faces persistent challenges, including corruption, inefficiency, incompetency, and underreporting, which have undermined public confidence in law enforcement. The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development oversees the court system, while the Department of Correctional Services manages the country's prisons. South Africa has the highest prison population in Africa, with chronic overcrowding and human rights concerns frequently reported. Critics argue that systemic weaknesses and uneven access to justice have fostered a culture of impunity, sustaining high crime rates and public mistrust. These issues continue to shape national debates on security, governance, and human rights.

Economy
South Africa has a mixed economy characterised by a well-developed financial sector, diversified industrial base, and abundant natural resources. It is the largest economy in Africa and is widely recognised as the continent's most industrialised, technologically advanced and diversified country. As of 2026, South Africa has a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) exceeding US$450 billion and one of the highest GDPs per capita in sub-Saharan Africa. The South African rand (ZAR) is the continent's most traded currency, while the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) is Africa's largest stock exchange. South Africa ranked 16th globally by total stock market capitalization in 2026, with its stock exchanges collectively valued at approximately US$1.53 trillion. South Africa is the only African member of the G20 and is also a member of BRICS, reflecting its importance within the global economy.
South Africa is a major trading nation, with exports accounting for a significant share of the economy. Its principal exports include minerals, vehicles, machinery, agricultural products, and manufactured goods, while China, the European Union, the United States, Germany, Japan, India, and the United Kingdom rank among its largest trading partners. The country also benefits from preferential access to international markets through agreements such as the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) and the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), reinforcing its role as a regional gateway for trade and investment.
Despite significant economic reforms undertaken since the end of apartheid in 1994, South Africa continues to face significant socioeconomic challenges, including high unemployment, widespread poverty, and one of the highest levels of income inequality in the world. More than half of the population lives below the upper-bound poverty line, while the country's Gini coefficient consistently ranks among the world's highest. Although the government has introduced measures to stabilise public finances, attract investment, and reduce inequality through social grants and a national minimum wage, progress has remained uneven.

Industries and services
The services sector is the largest component of the South African economy, accounting for approximately 70% of GDP and employing the majority of the workforce. Johannesburg serves as Africa's premier financial centre and is home to the continent's largest banks, multinational corporations, and the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, which had a market capitalization of approximately US$1.36 trillion in 2023, representing around 90% of Africa's total stock market value. The country's banking and financial services industry is the most developed on the continent, with major institutions including Standard Bank, First National Bank, Absa, and Nedbank operating extensively across Africa and internationally, while the South African Reserve Bank, the oldest central bank in Africa, oversees monetary policy and financial stability. South Africa possesses Africa's largest retail market and ranks sixth globally by total number of shopping centres. The country is also home to Nando's, South Africa's most internationally successful fast-food restaurant chain, which operates in more than 20 countries worldwide.
Manufacturing remains one of South Africa's largest industries, contributing around 13% of GDP and employing more than 1.7 million people. The country possesses the most advanced and diverse manufacturing sector in Africa, producing a wide range of goods for both domestic and international markets. The automotive industry forms the backbone of the sector, with Toyota, Volkswagen, BMW, Ford, Mercedes-Benz, and Nissan all operating large-scale assembly plants. South Africa is Africa's largest motor vehicle producer, manufacturing more than 600,000 vehicles annually, the majority of which are exported to Europe, Asia, and other African markets. Other major manufacturing industries include chemicals, steel, mining equipment, machinery, food and beverage processing, textiles, and military equipment, supported by a well-developed industrial base and extensive supply chains.
Mining remains one of South Africa's most important industries, contributing around 7–8% of GDP, accounting for more than half of merchandise exports, and making the country the world's fifth-largest mining economy by mining's contribution to GDP. South Africa was the world's leading gold producer for much of the 20th century, and remains the largest producer of platinum, chrome, manganese, and vanadium, while also ranking among the world's leading producers of coal, iron ore, diamonds, uranium, titanium, and gold. South Africa holds some of the world's most valuable mineral reserves, estimated at over US$2.5 trillion in total value, and ranks in the top 10 globally for 16 different mineral commodities. The country also possesses the world's largest reserves of platinum group metals (approximately 88% of the global total), manganese (around 80%), and chromite (about 72%).
Although agriculture contributes only around 2–3% of GDP, it remains strategically important to employment, food security, rural development, and exports. South Africa is one of the world's leading producers and exporters of citrus fruit, grapes, wine, maize, wool, mohair, and ostrich products. It is the world's largest producer of mohair and ostrich meat, while also ranking among the world's leading producers of pears, oranges, and sugar. Approximately half of the country's agricultural production is exported, making South Africa one of the Southern Hemisphere's leading agricultural exporters.

Tourism
South Africa is one of Africa's leading tourist destinations, with tourism forming an important component of the national economy. The sector contributes approximately 3.3% of gross domestic product and supports around 1.8 million jobs, representing more than 10% of national employment. In 2024, South Africa welcomed approximately 8.9 million international visitors through its various ports of entry, while in 2025 it was ranked among the world's leading travel destinations and the highest-rated destination in Africa and the Indian Ocean region by The Daily Telegraph.
South Africa is renowned for its diverse landscapes, abundant wildlife, and rich cultural heritage. The country is home to some of Africa's most recognisable natural attractions, including Kruger National Park, one of the continent's largest and most visited game reserves; Table Mountain, one of the New7Wonders of Nature; the Garden Route; the Drakensberg mountain range; Blyde River Canyon; and the beaches of the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces. Safari tourism remains one of the country's principal attractions, supported by an extensive network of national parks, private game reserves, and marine protected areas.
The country's major cities also attract millions of visitors each year. Cape Town, consistently ranked as the world's most beautiful city, is South Africa's leading tourist destination and is renowned for landmarks such as the V&A Waterfront, Table Mountain, Cape Point, and the nearby Cape Winelands. Johannesburg is the country's commercial centre and is home to attractions including the Apartheid Museum, Constitution Hill, and Gold Reef City, while Durban is known for its subtropical climate, beaches, and the Golden Mile waterfront promenade. Wine tourism has become a major industry, with the vineyards of Stellenbosch, Franschhoek, and Paarl ranking among the most visited destinations in the Southern Hemisphere.
South Africa has twelve UNESCO World Heritage Sites, reflecting its exceptional natural and cultural significance. These include Robben Island, the Cradle of Humankind, iSimangaliso Wetland Park, the Cape Floral Region Protected Areas, Mapungubwe National Park, the Maloti-Drakensberg Park, and the Richtersveld Cultural and Botanical Landscape.

Science and technology
Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa. South Africa was ranked 61st in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967; Max Theiler developed a vaccine against yellow fever, Allan MacLeod Cormack pioneered X-ray computed tomography (CT scan); and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques. Cormack and Klug received Nobel Prizes for their work. Sydney Brenner won in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology. Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company Thawte.
South Africa has a burgeoning astronomy community. It hosts the Southern African Large Telescope, the largest optical telescope in the Southern Hemisphere. South Africa is currently building the Karoo Array Telescope as a pathfinder for the €1.5 billion Square Kilometre Array project.
South Africa has also made significant contributions to military technology. The country pioneered the development of modern mine-resistant ambush protected (MRAP) vehicles, establishing the global standard for protecting military personnel against landmines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs), with South African designs later adopted and refined by armed forces around the world. South Africa's defence industry also pioneered helmet-mounted display technology for combat aircraft, integrating flight and weapons data directly into a pilot's field of view, while the Denel Rooivalk became the first attack helicopter to successfully perform a 360-degree loop.

Infrastructure
Transport
South Africa has the largest and most extensive transport infrastructure in Africa, comprising an integrated network of roads, railways, airports, seaports and pipelines. The country has approximately 750,000 kilometres (470,000 mi) of roads, making it the largest road network in Africa and the 12th-largest in the world. The South African National Roads Agency (SANRAL) manages the national road system, including major highways such as the N1, N2, N3 and N4, which connect the country's principal cities and form part of transcontinental routes such as the Cape to Cairo Highway.
The railway network extends approximately 36,000 kilometres (23,700 mi), making it the largest in Africa and the seventh-largest in the world. Freight services are operated primarily by Transnet Freight Rail, while commuter rail services are provided by the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA). The Gautrain rapid rail system links Johannesburg and Pretoria, providing the country's only higher-speed rail service.
South Africa has more than 1,500 airports, among the highest numbers in the world and the greatest of any African country. O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg is the largest and busiest airport in Africa, serving as the country's principal international gateway, while Cape Town International, King Shaka International and Chief Dawid Stuurman International airports are other major hubs. South Africa also has the continent's largest and most developed aviation market, served by airlines including South African Airways, Airlink, FlySafair, CemAir and LIFT.
South Africa's maritime sector is centred on the commercial ports of Durban, Cape Town, Gqeberha, Richards Bay, Saldanha Bay and East London. The Port of Durban is the busiest container port in sub-Saharan Africa and the fourth-largest in the Southern Hemisphere, while the Port of Richards Bay is one of the world's largest bulk export facilities. Port infrastructure is managed by the Transnet National Ports Authority, which plays a central role in supporting domestic logistics and international trade.

Energy
South Africa has the largest and most advanced energy sector in Africa and is the world's 22nd-largest producer of electricity. The sector is dominated by the state-owned utility Eskom, Africa's largest power company, which generates approximately 90% of the country's electricity. South Africa remains heavily reliant on coal, producing more than 200 million tonnes annually, making it the world's seventh-largest coal producer and one of the world's leading greenhouse gas emitters.
The national electricity grid has an installed generation capacity of approximately 60 GW, of which around 40–45 GW is supplied by coal-fired power stations. Electricity generation is supported by some of the world's largest coal-fired power stations, including Kusile, Medupi, Majuba and Kendal, while the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is Africa's first and only commercial nuclear power plant. Renewable energy from wind, solar and hydroelectric sources has expanded rapidly in recent years through independent power producers, alongside planned gas-to-power projects such as the proposed Richards Bay Gas Power Plant.
South Africa experienced a prolonged energy crisis during the 2010s and early 2020s, characterised by recurring load-shedding caused by ageing infrastructure, inadequate maintenance, corruption and sabotage at several power stations. Following extensive maintenance programmes, governance reforms, the removal and arrest of corrupt Eskom officials and contractors, and increased private-sector investment, the electricity system stabilised in 2024, bringing an end to regular nationwide load-shedding. Government energy policy focuses on diversifying the country's electricity mix through the Integrated Resource Plan, which provides for significant investment in renewable energy, battery storage, gas and new nuclear generation while reducing long-term dependence on coal and strengthening national energy security.

Water supply and sanitation
Two distinctive features of the South African water sector are the policy of free basic water and the existence of water boards, which are bulk water supply agencies that operate pipelines and sell water from reservoirs to municipalities. These features have led to significant problems concerning the financial sustainability of service providers, leading to a lack of attention to maintenance. Following the end of apartheid, the country had made improvements in the levels of access to water as those with access increased from 66% to 79% from 1990 to 2010. Sanitation access increased from 71% to 79% during the same period. However, water supply and sanitation has come under increasing pressure in recent years despite a commitment made by the government to improve service standards and provide investment subsidies to the water industry.
The eastern parts of South Africa suffer from periodic droughts linked to the El Niño weather phenomenon. In early 2018, Cape Town, which has different weather patterns to the rest of the country, faced a water crisis as the city's water supply was predicted to run dry before the end of June. Water-saving measures were in effect that required each citizen to use less than 50 litres (13 US gal) per day. Cape Town rejected an offer from Israel to help it build desalination plants.

Telecommunications
South Africa has the most advanced telecommunications sector in Africa, regulated by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA). The country serves as a key regional hub for digital connectivity, supported by several major undersea cable systems such as WACS, SAT-3, Seacom, and 2Africa, which link South Africa to global networks. Mobile penetration is among the highest on the continent, and internet access continues to expand rapidly across urban and rural areas.
The mobile communications market is led by major South African operators including Vodacom, MTN, Telkom, Cell C, and Rain. MTN, in particular, stands out as Africa's largest mobile network operator and one of the top ten globally, with nearly 290 million users as of 2022. South Africa offers a full range of network technologies from 2G to 5G, with MTN, Vodacom, and Rain being the first to launch 5G services on the entire African continent. While fixed-line connections have declined, fibre-optic broadband is growing quickly through providers such as Openserve, Vumatel, Frogfoot, Octotel, and MetroFibre. Satellite internet remains available for remote regions, though Starlink has yet to launch locally due to regulatory restrictions.

Demographics
South Africa is a nation of about 62 million (as of 2022) people of diverse origins, cultures, languages, and religions. The last census was held in 2022, with estimates produced on an annual basis. According to the United Nations World Population Prospects, South Africa's total population was 55.3 million in 2015, compared to only 13.6 million in 1950. South Africa is home to an estimated five million illegal immigrants, including some three million Zimbabweans. A series of anti-immigrant riots occurred beginning in May 2008.
Statistics South Africa asks people to describe themselves in the census in terms of five racial population groups. The 2022 census figures for these groups were: Black African at 81%, Coloured at 8.2%, White at 7.3%, Indian or Asian at 2.7%, and Other/Unspecified at 0.5%. The first census in 1911 showed that whites made up 22% of the population; this had declined to 16% by 1980.
South Africa hosts a sizeable refugee and asylum seeker population. According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, this population numbered approximately 144,700 in 2007. Groups of refugees and asylum seekers numbering over 10,000 included people from Zimbabwe (48,400), the DRC (24,800), and Somalia (12,900). These populations mainly lived in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, and Port Elizabeth.
One online database lists South Africa having more than 12,600 cities and towns.

Languages
South Africa has 12 official languages: Afrikaans, Zulu, Xhosa, English, Pedi, Tswana, Southern Sotho, Tsonga, Swazi, Venda, and Southern Ndebele (in order of first language speakers), as well as South African Sign Language, which was recognised as an official language in 2023. In this regard, it is fourth only to Bolivia, India, and Zimbabwe in number. While all the languages are formally equal, some languages are spoken more than others. According to the 2022 census, the three most spoken first languages are Zulu (24.4%), Xhosa (16.6%), and Afrikaans (10.6%). Although English is recognised as the language of commerce and science, it is only the fifth most common home language, that of only 8.7% of South Africans in 2022; nevertheless, it has become the de facto lingua franca of the nation. Estimates based on the 1991 census suggest just under half of South Africans could speak English. It is the second most commonly spoken language outside of the household, after Zulu.
Other languages are spoken, or were widely used previously, including Fanagalo, Khoe, Lobedu, Nama, Northern Ndebele, and Phuthi. Many of the unofficial languages of the San and Khoekhoe peoples contain regional dialects stretching northwards into Namibia and Botswana, and elsewhere. These people, who are a physically distinct population from the Bantu people who make up most of the Black Africans in South Africa, have their own cultural identity based on their hunter-gatherer societies. They have been marginalised, and the remainder of their languages are in danger of becoming extinct.
White South Africans may also speak European languages, including Italian, Portuguese (also spoken by black Angolans and Mozambicans), Dutch, German, and Greek, while some Indian South Africans and more recent migrants from South Asia speak Indian languages, such as Gujarati, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu. French is spoken by migrants from Francophone Africa.

Religion
According to the 2022 census, Christians accounted for 85.3% of the population, with a majority of them being members of various Protestant denominations (broadly defined to include syncretic African-initiated churches) and a minority of Catholics and other Christians. Per the 2001 census, the Christian category included Zion Christian (11.1%), Pentecostal (Charismatic) (8.2%), Catholic (7.1%), Methodist (6.8%), Dutch Reformed (6.7%), and Anglican (3.8%). Members of the remaining Christian churches accounted for the rest of the Christian population. Per the 2022 census, Muslims accounted for 1.6% of the population, Hindus 1.1%, traditional African religions 7.8%, 3.1% had no religious affiliation, and 1.1% were "other"."
African-initiated churches formed the largest of the Christian groups. It was believed that many of the persons who claimed no affiliation with any organised religion adhered to a traditional African religion. There are an estimated 200,000 traditional healers, and up to 60% of South Africans consult these healers, generally called sangoma ('diviner') or inyanga ('herbalist'). These healers use a combination of ancestral spiritual beliefs and a belief in the spiritual and medicinal properties of local fauna, flora, and funga commonly known as muti ('medicine'), to facilitate healing in clients. Many peoples have syncretic religious practices combining Christian and indigenous influences.
South African Muslims comprise mainly Coloureds and Indians. They have been joined by black or white South African converts as well as those from other parts of Africa. South African Muslims describe their faith as the fastest-growing religion of conversion in the country, with the number of black Muslims growing sixfold, from 12,000 in 1991 to 74,700 in 2004.
There is a substantial Jewish population, descended from European Jews who arrived as a minority amongst other European settlers. This population peaked in the 1970s at 118,000, though only around 75,000 remain today, the rest having emigrated, mostly to Israel. The present-day Jewish community in South Africa is the largest on the African continent, and the twelfth-largest in the world.

Education
The adult literacy rate in 2025 was 95%. This was the second-highest in Africa, behind only Seychelles. South Africa has a three-tier system of education starting with primary school, followed by high school, and tertiary education in the form of (academic) universities and universities of technology. Learners have twelve years of formal schooling, from grade 1 to 12. Grade R, or grade 0, is a pre-primary foundation year. Primary schools span the first seven years of schooling. High school education spans a further five years. The National Senior Certificate examination takes place at the end of grade 12, and is necessary for tertiary studies at a South African university. Public universities are divided into three types: traditional universities, which offer theoretically oriented university degrees; universities of technology (formerly called technikons), which offer vocationally-oriented diplomas and degrees; and comprehensive universities, which offer both types of qualification. There are 23 public universities in South Africa: 11 traditional universities, 6 universities of technology, and 6 comprehensive universities. There are also a large amount of FET (Further Education and Training) and TVET (Technical and Vocational Education and Training) colleges in South Africa.
Under apartheid, schools for black people were subject to discrimination through inadequate funding and a separate syllabus called Bantu Education which only taught skills sufficient to work as labourers.
In 2004, South Africa started reforming its tertiary education system, merging and incorporating small universities into larger institutions, and renaming all tertiary education institutions "university". By 2015, 1.4 million students in higher education have been aided by a financial aid scheme which was promulgated in 1999.

Health
According to the South African Institute of Race Relations, the life expectancy in 2009 was 71 years for a white South African and 48 years for a black South African. The healthcare spending in the country is about 9% of GDP. About 84% of the population depends on the public healthcare system, which is beset with chronic human resource shortages and limited resources. About 20% of the population use private healthcare. Only 16% of the population are covered by medical aid schemes; the rest pay for private care out-of-pocket or through in-hospital-only plans. The three dominant hospital groups, Mediclinic, Life Healthcare and Netcare, together control 75% of the private hospital market. These disparities have driven ongoing policy efforts to reform the healthcare system, including the introduction of National Health Insurance (NHI) aimed at expanding equitable access to healthcare.

HIV/AIDS
According to the 2015 UNAIDS medical report, South Africa has an estimated seven million people who are living with HIV – more than any other country in the world. In 2018, HIV prevalence—the percentage of people living with HIV—among adults (15–49 years) was 20.4%, and in the same year 71,000 people died from an AIDS-related illness.
A 2008 study revealed that HIV/AIDS infection is distinctly divided along racial lines: 13.6% of blacks are HIV-positive, whereas only 0.3% of whites have the virus. Most deaths are experienced by economically active individuals, resulting in many AIDS orphans who, in many cases, depend on the state for care and financial support. It is estimated that there are 1,200,000 orphans in South Africa.
The link between HIV, a virus spread primarily by sexual contact, and AIDS was long denied by President Thabo Mbeki and his health minister, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, who insisted that the many deaths in the country are caused by malnutrition, and hence poverty, and not HIV. In 2007, in response to international pressure, the government made efforts to fight AIDS. After the 2009 general elections, President Jacob Zuma appointed Aaron Motsoaledi as the health minister and committed his government to increasing funding for and widening the scope of HIV treatment, and by 2015, South Africa had made significant progress, with the widespread availability of antiretroviral drugs resulted in an increase in life expectancy from 52.1 years to 62.5 years.

Culture
The South African black majority still has a substantial number of rural inhabitants who lead largely impoverished lives. It is among these people that cultural traditions survive most strongly; as black people have become increasingly urbanised and Westernised, aspects of traditional culture have declined. Members of the middle class, who have historically been predominantly white but whose ranks include growing numbers of black, Coloured and Indian people, have lifestyles similar in many respects to that of people found in Western Europe, North America and Australasia.

Arts
South African art includes the oldest art objects in the world, which were discovered in a South African cave and dated from roughly 75,000 years ago. The scattered tribes of the Khoisan peoples moving into South Africa from around 10,000 BC had their own fluent art styles seen today in a multitude of cave paintings. They were superseded by the Bantu/Nguni peoples with their own vocabularies of art forms. Forms of art evolved in the mines and townships: a dynamic art using everything from plastic strips to bicycle spokes. The Dutch-influenced folk art of the Afrikaner trekboers and the urban white artists, earnestly following changing European traditions from the 1850s onwards, also contributed to this eclectic mix which continues to evolve to this day.

Media
The South African media sector is large, and South Africa is one of Africa's major media centres. While the many broadcasters and publications reflect the diversity of the population as a whole, the most commonly used language is English. However, all ten other official languages are represented to some extent. South Africa's media landscape is diverse and well-developed, comprising the public broadcaster SABC, the private free-to-air channel E.tv, and satellite television provider MultiChoice, which operates DStv across sub-Saharan Africa. The country has partially rolled out digital terrestrial television (DTT), though full migration from analogue broadcasting has experienced delays.

Popular culture
There is great diversity in South African music. Black musicians have developed styles called Kwaito and Amapiano. Of note is Brenda Fassie, who launched to fame with her song "Weekend Special", which was sung in English. More famous traditional musicians include Ladysmith Black Mambazo, while the Soweto String Quartet performs classical music with an African flavour. South Africa has produced world-famous jazz musicians, notably Hugh Masekela, Jonas Gwangwa, Abdullah Ibrahim, Miriam Makeba, Jonathan Butler, Chris McGregor, and Sathima Bea Benjamin.
Afrikaans music covers multiple genres, such as the contemporary Steve Hofmeyr, the punk rock band Fokofpolisiekar, and the singer-songwriter Jeremy Loops. South African popular musicians that have found international success include Manfred Mann, Johnny Clegg, rap-rave duo Die Antwoord, Tyla, and rock band Seether. Rappers such as AKA, Nasty C and Cassper Nyovest gained notoriety in other avenues like the BET Awards for best African acts.
Although few South African film productions are known outside South Africa, many foreign films have been produced about South Africa. Arguably, the most high-profile film portraying South Africa in recent years was District 9, as well as Chappie. Other notable exceptions are the film Tsotsi, which won the Academy Award for Foreign Language Film at the 78th Academy Awards in 2006, as well as U-Carmen e-Khayelitsha, which won the Golden Bear at the 2005 Berlin International Film Festival. In 2015, the Oliver Hermanus film The Endless River became the first South African film selected for the Venice Film Festival.

Literature
South African literature emerged from a unique social and political history. It "embraces all the languages and cultures of the people of South Africa" and began as an oral tradition. South Africa has 11 official spoken languages: Sepedi, Sesotho, Setswana, siSwati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga, Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa and isiZulu.

Literature in English
Notable white South African authors include anti-apartheid activist Alan Paton, who published the novel Cry, the Beloved Country in 1948. Nadine Gordimer became the first South African to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, in 1991. J.M. Coetzee won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2003. When awarding the prize, the Swedish Academy stated that Coetzee "in innumerable guises portrays the surprising involvement of the outsider."
Antjie Krog is a poet, journalist, academic and writer noted for confronting apartheid and its aftermath in her work. She reported on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission for the South African Broadcasting Corporation, and her best-known book is Country of My Skull (1998). Elsa Joubert was an Afrikaans novelist, travel-writer and journalist whose work draws on African landscapes and human experiences. She is best known for the 1979 novel Die swerfjare van Poppie Nongena (The Long Journey of Poppie Nongena), a story of a Black South African woman's endurance under apartheid, translated into many languages and widely celebrated.
One of the first well-known novels written by a black author in an African language was Solomon Thekiso Plaatje's Mhudi, written in 1930. During the 1950s, Drum magazine became a hotbed of political satire, fiction, and essays, giving a voice to the urban black culture.
The plays of Athol Fugard have been regularly premiered in fringe theatres in South Africa, London (Royal Court Theatre) and New York. Olive Schreiner's The Story of an African Farm (1883) was a revelation in Victorian literature: it has become recognised as one of the first feminist novels.
Breyten Breytenbach was jailed for his involvement with the guerrilla movement against apartheid. André Brink was the first Afrikaner writer to be banned by the government after he released the novel A Dry White Season.

Cuisine
South African cuisine is diverse and reflects the country's multicultural heritage, incorporating influences from indigenous African, Dutch, British, Indian and Cape Malay culinary traditions. Meat plays a central role in many regional food cultures, most notably through the braai, an originally Afrikaner variation of the barbecue that functions as both a cooking method and a widely shared social custom across communities. Common braai staples include boerewors (spiced sausage), lamb chops, steak, pap (maize porridge) and chakalaka (spicy relish). Traditional dishes also vary by region and heritage, including bobotie, a curried minced meat dish with an egg-based topping; bunny chow, a hollowed-out loaf of bread filled with curry originating in Durban; and potjiekos, a slow-cooked stew prepared in a cast-iron pot over an open flame. Street foods such as vetkoek, gatsby sandwiches, samoosas and biltong (air-dried cured meat) are widely consumed, while popular desserts such as milk tart and koeksisters reflect the country's layered culinary traditions.
South Africa also has a highly developed fast-food culture, with several locally founded chains achieving national and international prominence. The most notable is Nando's, founded in Johannesburg in 1987, which specialises in flame-grilled peri-peri chicken and operates more than 1,250 outlets in over 23 countries. Other major South African fast-food franchises include Wimpy, Steers, Debonairs Pizza and Chicken Licken, many of which have expanded throughout Africa and other regions. International fast-food brands are also well established in South Africa; the country is among the world's leading markets for KFC outlets, reflecting the widespread popularity of fast food across income groups and urban centres.
In the beverage sector, South Africa has played an influential role in both global energy drinks and wine. Monster Energy, although marketed as an American brand, was founded by South African-born entrepreneurs Rodney Sacks and Hilton Schlosberg, who relocated to the United States and played a central role in the company's international expansion. South African wine is also renowned internationally, with vineyards in regions such as Stellenbosch, Franschhoek, Paarl and Barrydale. These wine-producing areas form a significant part of the country's culinary tourism industry, contributing to South Africa's international reputation for food and drink.

Sports
Sport plays a significant role in South African culture, and the country's most popular sports are soccer, rugby union and cricket. Other sports with notable support are swimming, athletics, golf, boxing, mixed martial arts, tennis, ringball, field hockey, surfing and netball.
Soccer is the most popular sport in South Africa. South Africa hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup. It hosted the 1996 African Cup of Nations, with the national team Bafana Bafana going on to win the tournament. South Africa's men's U-20 team also won the 2025 U-20 Africa Cup of Nations. In 2022, the women's team also won the Women's Africa Cup of Nations, beating Morocco 2–1 in the final. The women's team went on to reach the last 16 at the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup, beating Italy and tying with Argentina in the group stage.
Famous combat sport personalities include Baby Jake Jacob Matlala, Vuyani Bungu, Welcome Ncita, Dingaan Thobela, Corrie Sanders, Gerrie Coetzee, Brian Mitchell, Garreth McLellan and current UFC Middleweight Champion Dricus du Plessis. Durban surfer Jordy Smith won the 2010 Billabong J-Bay Open making him the highest ranked surfer in the world. South Africa produced Formula One motor racing's 1979 world champion Jody Scheckter. Famous active Grand Prix motorcycle racing personalities include Brad Binder and his younger brother Darryn Binder.

South Africa has won the Rugby World Cup four times, the most wins of any country. South Africa first won the 1995 Rugby World Cup, which it hosted. They went on to win the tournament again in 2007, 2019 and 2023.
Cricket is one of the most played sports in South Africa. It has hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup, the 2007 World Twenty20 Championship. South Africa's national cricket team, the Proteas, have also won the inaugural edition of the 1998 ICC KnockOut Trophy by defeating West Indies in the final. The 2023 ICC Women's T20 World Cup was hosted in South Africa and the women's team won silver. The men's team won silver at the 2024 ICC T20 World Cup, and won the 2023–2025 ICC World Test Championship, beating Australia in the final. South Africa's national blind cricket team also went on to win the inaugural edition of the Blind Cricket World Cup in 1998.
In 2004, the swimming team of Roland Schoeman, Lyndon Ferns, Darian Townsend and Ryk Neethling won the gold medal at the Olympic Games in Athens, simultaneously breaking the world record in the 4×100 Freestyle Relay. Penny Heyns won Olympic Gold in the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games, and more recently, swimmers Tatjana Smith (née Schoenmaker), Lara van Niekerk, Akani Simbine and Wayde van Niekerk have all broken records and won medals at both the Olympic and Commonwealth Games, with Wayde van Niekerk being the world record holder in 400 metres since 2016. In 2012, Oscar Pistorius became the first double amputee sprinter to compete at the Olympic Games in London. Gary Player is regarded as one of the greatest golfers of all time, having won the Career Grand Slam, one of five to have done so.

See also
Timeline of South Africa
Outline of South Africa

Notes
References
Further reading
External links

Government of South Africa
"South Africa". The World Factbook (2025 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.
South Africa from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived)
South Africa from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of South Africa
 Geographic data related to South Africa at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in South Africa
South Africa is a major global tourist destination, with the tourism industry accounting for 3.3% of the country's GDP as of May 2025, according to Statistics South Africa (Stats SA).
In 2025, South Africa's international passenger arrivals reached a record 10.5 million people. This was up from 8.92 million the year before.
In 2025, South Africa was rated as the 4th best country in the world for tourism, as well as the best in the Africa and Indian Ocean region, by The Telegraph.
According to the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC), the tourism industry directly contributed R102 billion to South Africa's GDP in 2012, and supports 10.3% of the country's employment. 1.8 million people were employed in South Africa's tourism sector in early 2025, and this number is expected to grow significantly over the coming few years.
South Africa offers both domestic and international tourists a wide variety of options, among others the picturesque natural landscape and game reserves, diverse cultural heritage and highly regarded wines. Some of the most popular destinations include several national parks, such as the expansive Kruger National Park in the north of the country, the coastlines and beaches of the KwaZulu-Natal and Western Cape provinces, and the major cities of Cape Town, Durban, and Johannesburg.
The top five overseas countries with the largest number of tourists visiting South Africa in 2017 were the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, and France. Most of the tourists arriving in South Africa from elsewhere in Africa came from Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries. In terms of tourists from SADC countries, Zimbabwe topped the list at 31%, followed by Lesotho, Mozambique, Eswatini, and Botswana. In addition, Nigeria was the country of origin for nearly 30% of tourists arriving in South Africa.

Attractions
Biodiversity and ecotourism
South Africa is ranked nineteenth out of the world's twenty megadiverse countries South Africa is home to a large variety of animal life. Among the large mammals found in the northern bushveld include lions, leopards, cheetahs, white rhinoceroses, blue wildebeest, kudus, impalas, hyenas, hippopotamuses and giraffes. A significant extent of the bushveld exists in the north-east, including the Kruger National Park, one of the largest game reserves in Africa, and the Sabi Sand Game Reserve.
The Kruger National Park, established in 1926, is one of the most visited national parks in the country, with a total of 1 659 793 visitors in the 2014/15 period. The region is also home to nearly 80 percent of the world's rhino population. Due to COVID-19 restrictions impeding tourism and movement in the region, the killings of rhino species in South Africa have fallen by 53 percent in 2020.
The country is also particularly rich in plant diversity, with a wide variety of biomes found across the country. These include the grasslands in the Highveld, the succulent Karoo in central South Africa, and the endemic fynbos biome, constituting the majority of the area and plant life in the Cape floristic region of the Western Cape. This rare vegetation is protected as part of the Table Mountain National Park (which also includes the iconic flat-topped Table Mountain), which was the most-visited national park in South Africa in 2014/15, with a total of 2 677 767 visitors.

Ecotourism
Cultural attractions
In addition to its numerous natural attractions, South Africa also boasts numerous attractions of cultural significance. These include the fossil-bearing caves forming part of the Cradle of Humankind in Gauteng, the ruins of the Kingdom of Mapungubwe in northern Limpopo, the wine routes of the Western Cape, and various historical sites in the cities of Cape Town and Johannesburg (such as Robben Island, the Castle of Good Hope and Soweto township).

UNESCO World Heritage Sites
Ten South African sites are inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, including the iSimangaliso Wetland Park and uKhahlamba Drakensberg Park in KwaZulu-Natal. There are five Cultural WHS, four Natural WHS and 1 mixed WHS.

Statistics
In 2024, according to Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), South Africa experienced a growth in tourism numbers, with combined passenger arrivals through its ports of entry increasing to 8.92 million people.

Foreign arrivals by year
Tourist arrivals by country
Governance
The tourism industry in South Africa is managed by the Department of Tourism. The department is headed up by the Minister of Tourism; a position held since 2023 by leader of the GOOD party, Patricia de Lille.
The Department had a budget in the 2024/2025 fiscal year of R2.3 billion. This is allocated to the country's national marketing agency (which received R1.2 billion in the same year), and programs like the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) and Tourism Incentive Programmes (TIP).
The official national marketing agency of the South African government, with the goal of promoting tourism in South Africa both locally and globally is known as South African Tourism (SA Tourism).
Certain provinces and cities have their own tourism marketing agencies, tasked with similar responsibilities, but for their local jurisdictions. Examples are Wesgro in the Western Cape and Cape Town Tourism in Cape Town.

Contribution to GDP
Tourism in South Africa contributes a significant amount of money towards the country's GDP. In May 2025, according to Statistics South Africa (StatsSA), the tourism industry accounted for 3.3% of South Africa's GDP. This is up from 2.3% in 2019.
The total nominal GDP of the South African economy in 2024 was R7.3 trillion. Therefore, the South African tourism industry contributed an annual total of around R241 billion to the country's economy around the same time.
Taking the Department of Tourism's 2024/2025 fiscal year budget of R2.3 billion into account, the return on investment for the Department sits at around over 100 times.

Visa policy
Visitors to South Africa must obtain a visa from one of the South African diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries, in which case they get what is called a "Port of Entry Visa". Visitors who require a visa must apply in person and provide biometric data. See also the visa policy of South Africa.

History of tourism in South Africa
Prior to the democratic elections of 1994
If you can't put up with petty apartheid, don't go. The burden is on visitors to adapt to separate buses, doorways, post office windows, elevators, beaches, and toilets for people of separate skin color.
Before the end of apartheid, the nation was not largely celebrated as a tourist destination. As a result of the political unrest, the country faced difficulty in creating a highly-functioning tourism industry. Though the numbers indicate there was active tourism, it was not expansive and faced hardships as a result of the politics of the period.
The Traveler's Africa: A Guide to the Entire Continent reported in 1973 that South Africa was receiving 20,000 Americans a year, though even then the country was a controverisal destination. The book goes on to report that the visitors were carefully screened to keep out journalists and similar undesirables, and that "irritating foreigners" were regularly deported.

Years following democracy
In the years following the multiracial democratic election of 1994, South Africa opened its tourism horizons by hosting a variety of worldwide events including the 1995 Rugby World Cup, and the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The hosting of these events helped bolster South Africa's image and national identity.
After apartheid, there was an emergence of black-owned bed and breakfast establishments in the South African tourism industry. These establishments mainly exist in former "black spaces", also known as townships. These bed and breakfast locations mainly benefit from domestic tourism in South Africa. The national government sought to bolster black economic empowerment and the general structure of ownership in the tourism industry. Places such as Alexandra have become part of an initiative of "township tourism". The concept is meant to develop the townships by sharing their history and celebrating their culture with tourists.
South Africa, however, failed in their bid to host the 2004 Summer Olympics. Researchers have cited logistical and political reasons as to why the bid failed. For example, Cape Town was behind in the necessary means to support an event the size of the Olympics financially. Political reasons were also prevalent in the eventual failure of the bid as the committee was all-white and the motive to create a national identity seemed like a false promise to the majority black population of South Africa.
The Bid Committee had issues of reconciliation and accusations of racism specifically between Raymond Ackerman, a wealthy white man who led the bid, and Sam Ramsamy who was of Indian descent. Therefore, in an attempt to enhance the tourism industry through an Olympics bid, the challenge of cohesive action posed a great threat.
The 2010 FIFA World Cup is an example of a more successful route by South Africa to increase tourism and influence the nation positively. Firstly, the event helped to bolster South Africa's global brand and image. One of the main objectives in South Africa's attempt to host such events was to positively influence its national identity and erase the negative image of apartheid set forth prior to the nation's gradual shift to become the self-proclaimed "Rainbow Nation".
Some examples of SA reinventing itself through the tourism industry include the Apartheid Museum in Johannesburg, District Six Museum in Cape Town, and former prisons turned into powerful museums, such as Constitution Hill and Robben Island, which now attract many tourists each year.

Recent developments
In October 2025, Tourism Minister Patricia de Lille announced that for the first six months of 2025, tourism in South Africa had increased by 15.8% compared to the year before. Middle Eastern arrivals increased by 82.2%, Central and South American arrivals increased by 63.6%, Australasian arrivals increased by 38.0%, African land arrivals increased by 31.8%, and European arrivals increased by 20.8%. The increase in tourism numbers comes as SA prepares to roll out its Electronic Travel Authorization (ETA). The Minister said the country had a goal of 15 million visitors by 2030.

See also
Visa policy of South Africa
South African Tourism
Department of Tourism (South Africa)
Minister of Tourism (South Africa)

References
External links
Official South African Tourism Website
South African Department of Tourism

## Culture of South Africa
South Africa is known for its ethnic and cultural diversity. Almost all South Africans speak English to some degree of proficiency, in addition to their native language, with English acting as a lingua franca in commerce, education, and government. South Africa has twelve official languages, but other indigenous languages are spoken by smaller groups, chiefly Khoisan languages.
Members of the middle class, who are predominantly white and Indian but whose ranks include growing numbers of other groups, have lifestyles similar in many respects to that of people found in Western Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand.
The Apartheid state legally classified South Africans into one of four race groups, determined where they could live, and enforced segregation in education, work opportunities, public amenities, and social relations. Although these laws were abolished by the early 1990s, the apartheid racial categories remain ingrained in South African culture, with South Africans continuing to classify themselves, and each other, as belonging to one of the four defined race groups, such as Blacks, Whites, Coloureds, and Indians, making it difficult to define a single South African culture that does not refer to these racial categories.

History
Art
The oldest art objects in the world were discovered in a South African cave. Dating from 75,000 years ago, these small drilled snail shells could have no other function than to have been strung on a string as a necklace. South Africa was one of the cradles of the human species. One of the defining characteristics of the human species is the creation of art (from Latin "ars", meaning worked or formed from basic material).
The scattered tribes of Khoisan peoples moving into South Africa from around 10,000 BC had their own distinct art styles, evident today in numerous cave paintings. They were superseded by the Bantu and Nguni peoples, which developed their own vocabularies of art forms. In the 20th century, traditional tribal forms of art were scattered and re-melded by the divisive policies of apartheid.
New forms of art emerged in the mines and townships: a dynamic art using materials ranging from plastic strips to bicycle spokes. The Dutch-influenced folk art of the Afrikaner Trekboer and the urban white artists earnestly following changing European traditions from the 1850s onwards also contributed to this eclectic mix, which continues to evolve today.
One form of art developed during the apartheid period. This new characterisation was termed "township art" and became common in the 1960s and 1970s. This art style tended to depict scenes from the everyday life of poor black individuals in South Africa. Common visual elements in this art style are dilapidated houses, women washing clothes, penny whistlers, and black mother-and-child tableaux.

Contemporary South Africa has a vibrant art scene, with artists receiving international recognition. The recent "Figures and Fictions" exhibition of South African photography at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London included the work of Mikhael Subotzky, Zanele Muholi, David Goldblatt, Zwelethu Mthethwa, and Guy Tillim. Contemporary South African artists whose work has been met with international acclaim include Marlene Dumas, William Kentridge, and John Smith.

Architecture
The architecture of South Africa reflects the country's vast ethnic and cultural diversity and its colonial history. In addition, influences from other distant countries have contributed to the variety of the South African architectural landscape.

Herbert Baker, among the country's most influential architects, designed the Union Buildings in Pretoria. Other buildings of note include the Rhodes memorial and St George's Cathedral in Cape Town, and St John's College in Johannesburg.Cape Dutch architecture was prominent in the early days (17th century) of the Cape Colony, and the name derives from the fact that the initial settlers of the Cape were primarily Dutch. The style has roots in medieval Holland, Germany, France, and Indonesia. Houses in this style have a distinctive, recognisable design, with a prominent feature being the grand, ornately rounded gables, reminiscent of those in Amsterdam townhouses built in the Dutch style.
The rural landscape of South Africa is populated with traditional and European-influenced African architecture.

Cinema
While many foreign films have been produced about South Africa (usually focusing on race relations), few local productions are known outside South Africa. One exception was the 1980 film The Gods Must Be Crazy, set in the Kalahari. This is about how life in a traditional community of San (Bushmen) changes when a Coke bottle, dropped from a plane, suddenly lands from the sky. The late Jamie Uys, who wrote and directed The Gods Must Be Crazy, also had success overseas in the 1970s with his films Funny People and Funny People II, which were similar to the US TV series Candid Camera. Leon Schuster's You Must Be Joking! films belong to the same genre and are highly popular among South Africans. Schuster's most successful film internationally is Mr Bones, which was also the best performing film locally at the time of its release, grossing 35m USD. This was surpassed by the sequel, Mr Bones 2: Back from the Past.
The most high-profile film portraying South Africa in recent years was District 9. Directed by Neill Blomkamp, a native South African, and produced by Peter Jackson, the action/science-fiction film depicts a sub-class of alien refugees forced to live in the slums of Johannesburg in what many saw as a creative allegory for apartheid. The film was a critical and commercial success worldwide, and was nominated for Best Picture at the 82nd Academy Awards. Another notable film that was produced in South Africa is Chappie.
Other notable exceptions are the film Tsotsi, which won the Academy Award for Foreign Language Film at the 78th Academy Awards in 2006 as well as U-Carmen eKhayelitsha, which won the Golden Bear at the 2005 Berlin International Film Festival.

Literature
There are 12 national languages in South Africa. South Africa's unique social and political history has produced a vast body of literature, with themes spanning pre-colonial life, the era of apartheid, and the lives of people in the "new South Africa".
Many of the first black South African print authors were missionary-educated, and many wrote in either English or Afrikaans. One of the first well-known novels written by a black author in an African language was Solomon Thekiso Plaatje's Mhudi, written in 1930.
Notable white English-language South African authors include Nadine Gordimer, who was, in Seamus Heaney's words, one of "the guerrillas of the imagination", and who became the first South African and the seventh woman to be awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1991. Her novel, July's People, was published in 1981 and depicts the collapse of white-minority rule.
Athol Fugard, whose plays have been regularly premiered in fringe theatres in South Africa, London (The Royal Court Theatre), and New York City. Olive Schreiner's The Story of an African Farm (1883) was a revelation in Victorian literature; many consider it to have introduced feminism into the novel form.
Alan Paton published the acclaimed novel Cry, the Beloved Country in 1948. He told the tale of a black priest who comes to Johannesburg to find his son, which became an international best-seller. During the 1950s, Drum magazine became a forum for political satire, fiction, and essays, giving voice to urban black culture.
Afrikaans-language writers also began to write controversial material. Breyten Breytenbach was jailed for his involvement with the guerrilla movement against apartheid. Andre Brink was the first Afrikaner writer to be banned by the government after he released the novel A Dry White Season about a white South African who discovers the truth about a black friend who dies in police custody.
John Maxwell (JM) Coetzee was also first published in the 1970s, and became internationally recognise in 1983 with his Booker Prize-winning novel Life & Times of Michael K. His 1999 novel Disgrace won him his second Booker Prize as well as the 2000 Commonwealth Writers' Prize. He is also the recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2003.
English writer J. R. R. Tolkien, author of The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion, was born in Bloemfontein in 1892.

Poetry
South Africa has a rich tradition of oral poetry. Several influential African poets emerged in the 1970s, such as Mongane Wally Serote, whose most famous work, No Baby Must Weep, offered insight into the everyday lives of black South Africans under apartheid. Another famous black novelist, Zakes Mda, transitioned from poetry and plays to the novel during the same period. His book, The Heart of Redness, won the 2001 Commonwealth Writers Prize and was included in the school curriculum across South Africa.

Music
There is considerable diversity in South African music. Many black musicians who sang in Afrikaans or English during apartheid have since begun singing in traditional African languages and have developed unique styles known as Kwaito and Amapiano. Of note is Brenda Fassie, who launched to fame with her song "Weekend Special", which was sung in English. More famous traditional musicians include Ladysmith Black Mambazo, while the Soweto String Quartet performs classical music with an African flavour. European musical styles historically influenced white and Coloured South African singers.
South Africa has produced world-famous jazz musicians, notably Hugh Masekela, Jonas Gwangwa, Abdullah Ibrahim, Miriam Makeba, Jonathan Butler, Chris McGregor, and Sathima Bea Benjamin. Afrikaans music covers multiple genres, such as the contemporary Steve Hofmeyr and the punk rock band Fokofpolisiekar. Crossover artists such as Verity (internationally recognised for innovation in the music industry) and Johnny Clegg and his bands Juluka and Savuka have achieved success underground, in public, and abroad. Don Clarke who wrote Sanbonani, a local hit for PJ Powers, and Hotline in 1986 wrote much of the music for Leon Schuster's films including Till You're Free Again which he recorded for the film Frank and Fearless in 2018. The rap-rave group Die Antwoord has also achieved international success.
The South African music scene includes Kwaito and Amapiano, new music genres that emerged in the mid-1980s and late 2010s, respectively, and have since become popular socio-economic forms of representation among the populace. However, some argue that the political aspects of Kwaito have since diminished since apartheid, and that political interest has become a minor aspect of daily life. Others say that, in a sense, Kwaito is a political force that demonstrates activism through its ostensibly apolitical actions.
Today, major corporations such as Sony, BMG, and EMI have entered the South African market to produce and distribute Kwaito music. Due to its popularity and the general influence of DJs, who are among the country's top 5 most influential figures, Kwaito has taken over radio, television, and magazines.
South African rock music is a popular subculture, particularly in the Johannesburg region. The alternative rock and metal band Seether gained international popularity in the early 2000s, with five of their albums achieving Gold or Platinum certification in the United States. Four other rock bands, KONGOS, Civil Twilight, Prime Circle, the Parlotones and have also achieved success abroad in the late 2000s. While metal bands such as Vulvodynia have achieved moderate success in the 2020s.

Science and technology
Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa. The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967. Max Theiler developed a vaccine against Yellow Fever, Allan MacLeod Cormack pioneered x-ray computed tomography, and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques. These advancements were all (except Barnard's) recognised with the Nobel Prize. Sydney Brenner won most recently, in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology.
Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company, Thawte, that was subsequently bought out by world-leader Verisign.
South Africa has cultivated a burgeoning astronomy community. It hosts the Southern African Large Telescope, the largest optical telescope in the southern hemisphere. South Africa is currently constructing the Karoo Array Telescope as a pathfinder for the $20 billion Square Kilometre Array project, to be built in South Africa and Australia.

Cuisine
The cuisine of South Africa is heavily meat-based and has given rise to the distinctively South African social gathering known as a braai. A variation of the barbecue, braais often feature boerewors or spicy sausages, and mielies (maize) or Mielie-meal, often as a porridge, or pearl millet, a staple food of black South Africans. Pastries such as koeksisters and desserts such as melktert (milk tart) are also widely popular.

Indian food like curry is also popular, especially in Durban with its large Indian population. Another local Indian Durban speciality is the "bunny", or bunny chow, which consists of a hollowed-out loaf of white bread filled with curry.
The Portuguese community has also made its mark, with spicy peri-peri chicken being a favourite. The South African Portuguese-themed restaurant chain Nando's now has restaurants in the United Kingdom, United States, Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, Malaysia, Kenya, and the United Arab Emirates.

Wine
South Africa has developed into a major wine producer, with some of the best vineyards lying in valleys around Stellenbosch, Franschhoek, Paarl and Barrydale. South African wine has a history dating back to 1659, and at one time Constantia was considered one of the world's greatest wines. Access to international markets has spurred a surge in new energy and investment. Production is concentrated around Cape Town, with major vineyards and production centres at Paarl, Stellenbosch, and Worcester.
There are approximately 60 appellations within the Wine of Origin (WO) system, which was implemented in 1973, with a hierarchy of designated production regions, districts, and wards. WO wines must be made 100% from grapes from the designated area. "Single vineyard" wines must come from a defined area of less than 5 hectares. An "Estate Wine" can come from adjacent farms, as long as they are farmed together and wine is produced on site. A ward is an area with a distinctive soil type and/or climate, and is roughly equivalent to a European appellation.

Education
Learners have twelve years of formal schooling, from grade 1 to 12. Grade R is a pre-primary foundation year. Primary schools span the first seven years of schooling. High School education spans a further five years. The Senior Certificate examination takes place at the end of grade 12 and is necessary for tertiary studies at a South African university.
Public universities in South Africa are divided into three types: traditional universities, which offer theoretically oriented university degrees; universities of technology (formerly called "Technikons"), which offer vocational-oriented diplomas and degrees; and comprehensive universities, which offer both types of qualification. Public institutions are usually in English, although instruction may also take place in Afrikaans. There are also a large number of other educational institutions in South Africa – some are local campuses of foreign universities, some conduct classes for students who write their exams at the distance-education University of South Africa, and some offer unaccredited or non-accredited diplomas.
Public expenditure on education was at 6.1% of the 2016 GDP.
Under apartheid, schools for blacks were subject to discrimination through inadequate funding and a separate syllabus called Bantu Education which was only designed to give them sufficient skills to work as labourers. Redressing these imbalances has been a focus of recent education policy; see Education in South Africa: Restructuring.

Scouting
South Africa has also had a significant influence on the Scouting movement, with many Scouting traditions and ceremonies coming from the experiences of Robert Baden-Powell (the founder of Scouting) during his time in South Africa as a military officer in the 1890s-1900s. Scouts South Africa (then known as the Boy Scouts of South Africa) was among the first youth organisations to open its doors to youth and adults of all races in South Africa. This happened on 2 July 1977 at a conference known as Quo Vadis.

Societal structure
Gender roles
Sexual orientation
South Africa enacted same-sex marriage laws in 2006, allowing full marriage and adoption rights to same-sex couples. Although the Constitutional and legal system in South Africa theoretically ensures equality, social acceptance is generally lacking, especially outside of urban areas. Lesbian women from smaller towns (especially the townships) are often victims of beating or rape. This has been posited, in part, to be because of the perceived threat they pose to traditional male authority. Although evidence of hatred may influence rulings on a case-by-case basis, South Africa has no specific hate crime legislation; human rights organisations have criticised the South African police for failing to address the matter of bias-motivated crimes.
For example, the NGO ActionAid has condemned the continued impunity and accused governments of turning a blind eye to reported murders of lesbians in homophobic attacks in South Africa; as well as to so-called "corrective" rapes, including cases among pupils, in which cases the male rapists purport to raping the lesbian victim with the intent of thereby "curing" her of her sexual orientation.

Sports
The most popular sports in South Africa are association football, rugby, and cricket. Other sports with significant support are field hockey, swimming, athletics, golf, boxing, tennis, netball and softball. Although association football commands the greatest following among the youth, other sports like basketball, surfing, judo and skateboarding are becoming increasingly popular.
Famous combat sport personalities include Baby Jake Jacob Matlala, Vuyani Bungu, Welcome Ncita, Dingaan Thobela, Corrie Sanders, Gerrie Coetzee, Brian Mitchell and Dricus du Plessis. Footballers who have played for major foreign clubs include Lucas Radebe and Philemon Masinga, (both formerly of Leeds United), Quinton Fortune (Atlético Madrid and Manchester United), Benni McCarthy (also first-team coach at Manchester United) (Ajax Amsterdam, F.C. Porto, Blackburn Rovers and West Ham United), Aaron Mokoena (Ajax Amsterdam, Blackburn Rovers and Portsmouth), Delron Buckley (Borussia Dortmund) and Steven Pienaar (Ajax Amsterdam and Everton). South Africa has also produced 1979 Formula One World Champion, Jody Scheckter, along with his son, two time Indycar Series race winner, Tomas Scheckter, who led the most laps in both his first two Indianapolis 500 starts during the 2002 and 2003 running of the race. In MotoGP, notable racers include Brad Binder and his younger brother, Darryn Binder. Durban Surfer Jordy Smith won the 2010 Billabong J-Bay competition, making him the No. 1-ranked surfer in the world. Famous cricket players include Herschelle Gibbs, Graeme Smith, Dale Steyn, Jonty Rhodes, Jacques Kallis, JP Duminy, Quinton de Kock, Faf du Plessis, Keshav Maharaj, Kagiso Rabada, David Miller and AB de Villiers, etc. Most of them have also participated in the Indian Premier League.
South Africa has also produced numerous world class rugby players, including Francois Pienaar, Joost van der Westhuizen, Danie Craven, Frik du Preez, Naas Botha, Bryan Habana, Siya Kolisi, Cheslin Kolbe, Duane Vermeulen, Eben Etzebeth and Makazole Mapimpi. South Africa hosted and won the 1995 Rugby World Cup and won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France as well as the 2019 Rugby World Cup in Japan, and the 2023 Rugby World Cup, again in France. It followed the 1995 Rugby World Cup by hosting the 1996 African Cup of Nations, with the national team going on to win the tournament. It also hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup and the 2007 World Twenty20 Championship, and was the host nation for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the first time the tournament was held in Africa. FIFA president Sepp Blatter awarded South Africa a grade of 9 out of 10 for successfully hosting the event.
In 2004, the swimming team of Roland Schoeman, Lyndon Ferns, Darian Townsend, and Ryk Neethling won the gold medal at the Olympic Games in Athens, simultaneously breaking the world record in the 4x100 freestyle relay. Penny Heyns won Olympic Gold in the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games. Swimmer Tatjana Smith (née Schoenmaker) won gold and silver medals at both the Olympic Games and the Commonwealth Games.
In golf, Gary Player is generally regarded as one of the greatest golfers of all time, having won the Career Grand Slam, one of five golfers to have done so. Other South African golfers to have won major tournaments include Bobby Locke, Ernie Els, Retief Goosen, Trevor Immelman and Louis Oosthuizen.

See also
List of South Africans
List of heritage sites in South Africa
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities
South African art
South Africa
List of South African artists


== References ==

## Cuisine of South Africa
South African cuisine draws from the culinary traditions of the various communities that inhabit the country. Among the indigenous peoples of South Africa, the Khoisan foraged over 300 species of edible food plants, such as the rooibos shrub legume, whose culinary value continues to influence South African cuisine. Subsequent encounters with Bantu pastoralists facilitated the emergence of cultivated crops and domestic cattle, which supplemented traditional Khoisan techniques of meat preservation. In addition, Bantu-speaking communities produced an extensive repertoire of ingredients and dishes, many of which are still consumed today in traditional settlements and urban entrepôts alike.
South African cuisine is heavily based on meat consumption. A widely observed culinary tradition is braai, a social event in which South Africans gather to cook meat over an open fire. A popular South African snack is biltong, a dried, spiced meat.

History
The San peoples were hunter-gatherers, who mostly depended on foods like tortoises, crayfish, coconuts, and squash. Agriculture was introduced to South Africa by the Bantu peoples, who continue in the cultivation of grain, starch fruit and root tubers — in the manner of maize, squash, and sweet potatoes, following their introduction in the Columbian exchange, displacing the production of many Old World food crops. Mabele (red sorghum) and madumbe (cocoyam, taro, or arrowroot) also continue to be widely cultivated.
By the 17th century, Dutch and British foodways, introduced through European immigration, contributed to further culinary diffusion. The Cape Malay community founded a distinctive diasporic cuisine, derived largely from Southeast Asian culinary traditions, while Afrikaner voortrekkers further inland adapted Dutch, Khoisan, Cape Malay, and Bantu foodways to accommodate their peripatetic lifestyle. In addition, French Huguenot refugees, many of whom settled in Franschhoek, played an instrumental role in developing South Africa's viticultural industry.
During the period of British colonial rule, immigrants from Asia, many of whom arrived as indentured laborers in the 19th century, further enriched South Africa's culinary repertoire. In particular, Indian South Africans introduced a wealth of spices, seasonings, and dishes, historically associated with KwaZulu-Natal. However, Indian cuisine is now widely available across South Africa and consumed by all ethnic groups.
Disinvestments and sanctions imposed on South Africa during apartheid stifled the country's culinary output. At this time, shebeens, situated in urban townships, became very popular and often served as non-formal community centers, especially for black South Africans who maintained their cultural and culinary traditions. Following the end of apartheid, South African cuisine witnessed a renaissance, with diverse culinary options available in most of the country's major cities catering to tourists, expatriates, and residents. In addition, South African ingredients and dishes have attained greater visibility worldwide, owing to the burgeoning South African diaspora.

National cookery
Beverages
Beer has been an essential beverage in South Africa for hundreds of years, among indigenous peoples long before colonisation and the arrival of Europeans, who brought their own beer-drinking traditions. Traditional beer was brewed from local grains, especially sorghum. Beer was so prized that it became central to many ceremonies, such as betrothals and weddings, in which one family ceremoniously offered beer to the other.
Unlike European beer, South African traditional beer was unfiltered and cloudy, with low alcohol content. Around the turn of the 1900s, as white-owned industry began studying malnutrition among urban workers, it was discovered that traditional beer provided crucial vitamins that were sometimes unavailable in the grain-heavy traditional diet and even less available in urban industrial slums.
As South Africa's mines developed and black South Africans began to urbanise, women also moved to the city. They started brewing beer for the predominantly male labour force—a labour force that was mostly single or had left their wives in the rural areas under the migrant labour system. That tradition of urban women making beer for the labour force persists in South Africa to the extent that informal bars and taverns (shebeens) are typically owned by women (shebeen queens).
Today, most urban dwellers purchase beer from industrial breweries that produce beer similar to that sold in Europe and America. In contrast, rural residents and recent city immigrants still enjoy the cloudy, unfiltered traditional beer.
Compared with an American or Western European diet, milk and milk products are very prominent in the traditional Black South African diet. As cows were considered highly desirable domestic animals in precolonial societies, milk was abundant. In the absence of refrigeration, various kinds of soured milk, somewhat like yogurt, were a dietary mainstay. A visitor to any African village in the 1800s would have been offered a large calabash of cool fermented milk as a greeting.
Because milk cows allowed women to wean their children early and become fertile more quickly, local cultures had numerous sayings linking cattle, milk, and population growth, such as the Sotho-Tswana saying, "cattle beget children."
Today, in the dairy section of South African supermarkets, one will find a variety of milks, sour milk, sour cream, and other modern versions of traditional milk products.

Indigenous cookery
In the precolonial period, indigenous cuisine was characterised by the use of a wide range of foods, including fruits, nuts, bulbs, leaves, and other products gathered from wild plants, as well as the hunting of wild game. The introduction of domestic cattle and grain crops by Bantu speakers who arrived in the southern regions from north-east Africa since 200 AD, and the spread of cattle keeping to Khoisan groups, enabled the production of products and the availability of fresh meat on demand.
The pre-precolonial period consisted primarily of cooked grains, especially sorghum and millet, fermented milk (somewhat like yogurt), and roasted or stewed meat. At some point, maize replaced sorghum as the primary grain, and there is some dispute as to whether maize, a Central American crop, arrived with European settlers (notably the Portuguese) or spread through Africa before white settlements via Africans returning from the Americas during the era of the slave trade.
People also kept sheep and goats, and communities often organised large-scale hunts for abundant game, but beef was considered the most important and highest-status meat. The ribs of any cattle that were slaughtered in many communities were so prized that they were offered to the chief of the village.
In many ways, the daily diet of South African families can be traced to the indigenous foods eaten by their ancestors. A typical meal in a Bantu-speaking South African household consists of a stiff, fluffy porridge of maize meal (called pap, and very similar to American grits) with a flavorful stewed meat gravy. Traditional rural families (and many urban ones) often ferment their pap for a few days—especially when it is sorghum rather than maize—which gives it a tangy flavour. The Sotho-Tswana call this fermented pap, ting.
Vegetables used are often pumpkin varieties indigenous to South Africa, although many people now eat pumpkins that originated in other countries. Rice and beans are also very popular, although they are not indigenous. Another typical vegetable dish, which arrived in South Africa with its many Irish immigrants, but which has been adopted by South Africans, is shredded cabbage and white potatoes cooked with butter.

For many South Africans, meat is central to any meal. The Khoisan ate roasted meat and dried it for later use. The influence of their diet is reflected in the shared Southern African love of barbecue (generally called in South Africa by its Afrikaans name, a braai) and biltong (dried, preserved meat). As in the past, when men kept cattle as their prized possession in the rural areas, South Africans have a preference for beef.
Today, South Africans enjoy not only beef but also mutton, goat, chicken, and other meats as the centerpiece of a meal. On weekends, many South African families have a braai, and the meal usually consists of pap en vleis, which is maize meal and grilled meat. Eating meat even has a ritual significance in both traditional and modern South African culture.
In Bantu culture, for weddings, initiations, the arrival of family members after a long trip, and other special occasions, families purchase a live animal, slaughter it at home, and then prepare a large meal for the community or neighbourhood. Participants often say that spilling the blood of the animal on the ground pleases the ancestors who invisibly gather around the carcass. On holiday weekends, entrepreneurs set up pens of live animals along township main roads—primarily sheep and goats—for families to purchase, slaughter, cook, and eat. Because beef is the most prized meat for weddings, affluent families often buy a live steer for slaughter at home.

European and Asian originated cookery
During the 17th century, new foods such as biltong, droëwors, and rusks evolved locally out of necessity.

British cookery
South Africa was a colony of the British Empire and thus has strong influences from the United Kingdom. As British people settled in South Africa, they brought their cuisine, which influenced South African cuisine.
Sunday roast is as popular in South Africa as Australia, Canada, and New Zealand where there are influences from the UK. In South Africa, Yorkshire pudding is replaced by gravy sauce and rice.
Fish and chips are also popular in South Africa. Fish and chip shops employ dynamic selling methods, such as street vendors or vans. Typically fried fish are hakes and snoeks.
Meat pies and other savoury pies are readily available at most grocery stores and many petrol stations. Popular variants include sausage roll, Cornish pasty, and pepper steak pie.

Cape Dutch and Cape Malay cookery
A very distinctive regional style of South African cooking is often referred to as "Cape Dutch". This cuisine is characterised mainly by the usage of spices such as nutmeg, allspice, and chili peppers. The Cape Dutch cookery style owes at least as much to the cookery of the enslaved people brought by the Dutch East India Company to the Cape from Bengal, Java and Malaysia as it does to the European styles of cookery imported by settlers from the Netherlands, and this is reflected in the use of eastern spices and the names given to many of these dishes.
The Cape Malay influence has brought spicy curries, sambals, pickled fish, and a variety of fish stews.
Bobotie is a South African dish of Cape Malay origin. It consists of spiced minced meat baked with an egg-based topping. Of the many dishes eaten every day in South Africa, bobotie is perhaps closest to being the national dish, because it is not commonly found in any other country. The recipe originates from the Dutch East India Company colonies in Batavia, with the name derived from the Indonesian bobotok. It is also seasoned with curry powder, imparting a slight tang. It is often served with sambal, a hint of its origins from the Malay Archipelago.
South African yellow rice, a sweet dish made with turmeric, raisins, cinnamon and sugar, also has its origins in Cape Malay cookery, and is often referred to as Cape Malay yellow rice.

French cookery
French Huguenot refugees brought wines as well as their traditional recipes from France.

Indian cookery
Curried dishes are popular in South Africa among people of all ethnic origins; many curried dishes came to the country with the thousands of Indian indentured labourers brought there in the nineteenth century. South African Indian cuisine has contributed to South African cooking with a wide variety of dishes and culinary practices, including curries, sweets, chutneys, fried snacks such as samoosas, and other savoury foods.
Bunny chow, a dish from Durban ("the largest 'Indian' city outside of India"), consisting of a hollowed-out loaf of bread filled with curry, has been adapted into mainstream South African cuisine. In the townships surrounding Pretoria, the capital, and Johannesburg, this sandwich is often referred to as a sphatlho or kota.

Restaurants and outlets
South Africa can be characterized by a significant "eating out" culture. While some restaurants specialise in traditional South African dishes or modern interpretations thereof, restaurants featuring other cuisines such as Moroccan, Chinese, West African, Congolese, and Japanese can be found in all of the major cities and many of the larger towns. There are also many home-grown chain restaurants, such as Spur and Dulce Café.
There is also a proliferation of fast-food restaurants in South Africa. While some international players such as Kentucky Fried Chicken and McDonald's are active in the country, they face stiff competition from local chains such as Nando's, Galito's, Steers, Chicken Licken, Barcelos, Fat Cake City and King Pie. Many restaurant chains originating in South Africa have also expanded successfully beyond the country's borders. Also, Starbucks is present in the country.

Typical South African foods and dishes
Savoury
Game and meats
Afrikaans

Biltong—dried meat (typically seasoned with coriander seeds and salt). Although beef is most commonly used, springbok, kudu, eland, chicken, and ostrich may also be used.
Boerewors—a sausage that is traditionally braaied (barbecued).
Droëwors—translates to 'dried sausage' and is made like boerewors, but pork is left out. It is dried the same way as biltong.
Frikkadelle—usually baked, but sometimes deep-fried, meatballs.
Bokkoms—whole, salted and dried mullet.
Skilpadjies—lamb's liver wrapped in netvet (caul fat) and braaied over hot coals.
Smoked or braaied snoek—a regional gamefish.
Sosatie—kebab, grilled marinated meat on a skewer.
Amanqina—chicken feet, cow feet, pig feet, lamb feet, and sheep feet, usually consumed with pap or as a delicacy.
Chicken feet—grilled or deep-fried chicken feet and head. Another dish is a cooked pig’s head known as a "smiley", most popular in townships and sold by street vendors, sometimes in industrial areas with high concentrations of workers.
Ostrich—an increasingly popular protein source, as it has low cholesterol content; used in stews or filleted and grilled.

Meals
Tsonga and Venda

Mashonja/matamani—made from mopani worms
Afrikaans

Gesmoorde vis—salted cod or snoek with potatoes and tomato sauce, sometimes served with apricot, grapes or moskonfyt.
Hoenderpastei—chicken pot pie, traditional Afrikaans fare.

Kaiings—made from lamb tail or lamb flank cut into small cubes, and cooked in a cast-iron pot over a slow fire. Kaiings resemble cracklings, though the skin is less puffy and crispy, and a small piece of protein is usually left on the skin and fat. They are a chewy traditional Boer delicacy, often served as a topping over pap or with honey.
Mielie-meal—a staple food, often used in baking but predominantly cooked into pap or ugali
Oepsies—a starter made on a braai. Similar to the American devils on horseback but exclusively made with cherries wrapped in bacon and battered with barbecue sauce.
Paptert—a tart used as a side dish for a braai. Made from pap, cheese, canned tomatoes, and bacon. Both modern and traditional.
Potjiekos—a traditional Afrikaans stew, made with meat and vegetables and cooked over coals in cast-iron pots.
Tomato bredie—a lamb and tomato stew.
Waterblommetjiebredie (water flower stew)—meat stewed with the flower of the Cape pondweed.
Indian

Biryani—a traditional rice and red meat/chicken or vegetable dish originating from the Muslim community of the Indian subcontinent.
Bunny chow—curry stuffed into a hollowed-out loaf of bread, often called kota by the locals (usually those of African descent) who sometimes, instead of curry, fill the bread with slap chips (French fries), a slice of polony (bologna), cheese, and atchar (South Asian pickle) and other fillings and spices.
Durban curry—more spicy than the Cape Malay version due to the use of masala. Typically, mutton/lamb is used, and the most common spice mixture consists of ground cayenne pepper, paprika, cinnamon, cumin, and fennel. Potatoes and carrots are sometimes added.
Lamb chop chutney—fried lamb chops placed in a tomato chutney with green chillies.
Malay

Bobotie—a dish of Malay descent, is like meatloaf with raisins and with baked egg on top, and is often served with yellow rice, sambals, coconut, banana slices, and chutney.
Cape Malay curry—a curry most often made with chicken and spiced with mild masala. Spices include cinnamon, ginger, cardamom, cayenne pepper, coriander, garlic, turmeric, bay leaves, and fenugreek.
Sotok
Indomie
Zulu, Xhosa and Sotho

Dombolo—dumplings, flour mixture usually steamed in a pot.
Isidudu/umdoko/motogo—soft porridge made from ground corn known as "mealie meal", similar to American grits.
Mala mogodu/ulusu—a local variation of tripe, usually eaten with hot pap and spinach.
Iinkobe—summer salad made with boiled corn.
Sigwaqani—boiled beans mixed with mealie-meal.
Mqhavunyeko—wet corn mixed with beans.
Trotters and beans—from the Cape, made from boiled pig's or sheep's trotters and onions and beans.
Pap/papa—maize porridge in South Africa, traditional porridge/polenta, and a staple food of the African peoples
Umngqusho—a dish made from white maize and sugar beans, a staple food for the Xhosa people.
Umphokoqo/phuthu—a cooked dish of crumbly maize meal.
Umvubo—sour milk mixed with dry pap.
Inhloko/Smiley—a boiled stew of a cow or sheep's head, usually served with phuthu.

Breads
Afrikaans

Braaibroodjie—a sandwich consisting of two slices of bread with a filling of sliced tomato, cheese, onion, South African peach chutney (traditionally Mrs. H.S. Balls) seasoned with salt and pepper. The braaibroodjie is placed in a folding braai grid (gridiron) and slowly grilled over medium-hot coals until the cheese melts and the bread is browned.
Gatsby—a sandwich popular in Cape Town, a long roll with fillings of anything ranging from polony (bologna) to chicken or steak and hot chips.
Potbrood (pot bread or boerbrood)—savoury bread baked over coals in cast-iron pots.
Vetkoek (fat cake, doughnut, Amagwinya (in various Nguni languages))—deep-fried dough balls, typically stuffed with meat or served with snoek fish or jam.
Indian

Samosa, or samoosa—a savoury stuffed Indian pastry that is fried.
Kota—a sandwich, quarter-loaf of bread usually stuffed with polony (bologna), cheese, atchar (South Asian pickle), and chips (French fries).

Relishes and spreads
Blatjang, or Mrs. H.S. Balls Chutney, a sweet sauce made from fruit that is usually poured on meat
Chakalaka—a spicy South African vegetable relish.
Melrose Cheese Spread
Monkey gland sauce—made of chopped onion, garlic, and ginger, with a combination of chutney, soy sauce, mustard, Worcestershire sauce, ketchup, and wine (no actual monkey meat)

Fruits and plants
Makatane—a wild fruit that grows in the Kalahari desert. It is soaked in limewater overnight (to remove the bitter taste) before processing into a jam known as makataan konfyt.
Marula—the yellow fruit of a local tree. Amarula liqueur is made from this fruit. The ripe fruit lying on the ground is processed into jams, wine, and beer. Many local communities depend on this fruit for extra income. The jam is eaten with roosterkoek and on venison steaks, such as kudu.
Morogo—spinach-like wild plant sometimes seen as a weed. Traditionally boiled and served with pap, or dried in small lumps for extended shelf life. The traditional Afrikaner/Boer preparation usually incorporates onion, potato, or both.

Sweet
Bar One sauce—usually poured over vanilla ice-cream, made from melted Bar One chocolate and cream.
Hertzoggie—a tartlet with an apricot jam filling and dried coconut meringue topping.
Koeksisters—come in two forms and are a sweet delicacy among all South Africans. Afrikaans koeksisters are twisted pastries, deep fried, and strongly sweetened. Koesisters found in the Cape Flats are sweet and spicy, shaped like large eggs, and deep-fried.
Malva pudding—a sweet spongy apricot pudding of Dutch origin.
Mebos—dried apricots seasoned with sugar or salt.
Melktert—a milk-based tart or dessert.
Melkkos—a traditional South African dish. Served as a standalone dish for supper and for lunch in some instances. (Famous traditional cookbooks such as the "Kook en Geniet" don't refer to this a dessert though).
Mealie-bread—a sweet bread baked with sweetcorn.
Mosbolletjies—a sweet bun made with aniseed and a grape juice leavening agent from the wine-making region of South Africa. Baked twice to make mosbeskuit.
Pampoenkoekies (pumpkin fritters)—flour has been supplemented with or replaced by pumpkin. Some variants are patatkoekie (sweet-potato fritter), aartappelkoekie (potato fritter), ryskoekie (rice fritter), where pumpkin is replaced with either sweet potato, potato, or rice.
Peppermint crisp tart—a traditional fridge tart made with peppermint crisp chocolate, caramel treat, Tennis biscuits, and fresh cream.
Rusks—a rectangular, hard, dry biscuit eaten after being dunked in tea or coffee; they are either home-baked or shop-bought (with the most popular brand being Ouma Rusks).

Drinks
Amasi—fermented milk.
Boeber—a traditional Cape Malay sweet milk drink, made with vermicelli, sago, sugar, and flavoured with cardamom, stick cinnamon, and rose water.
Mafi—fermented milk, often consumed with pap or by itself.
Mageu—a drink made from fermented mealie pap.
Rooibos—a herbal tea indigenous to South Africa.
Skokiaan—a dangerous bootleg drink consumed during the Apartheid era.
Springbokkie—a cocktail shooter composed of crème de menthe (mint liqueur) and Amarula (marula fruit cream liqueur).
Umqombothi—a type of beer made from fermented maize and sorghum.

See also
List of African cuisines
Malay cuisine
Indian cuisine
Dutch cuisine
South African wine

Footnotes
References
Citations
Sources
Basemzanzi, B., & Moroka, T. 2004. South African indigenous foods : a collection of recipes of indigenous foods. Pretoria, IndiZAFoods.

External links

South African cuisine – International Marketing Council of South Africa web site
Food tourism
DBFOODS.ORG
Johannesburg Restaurants

## List of museums in South Africa
This list of museums in South Africa is a list of museums, defined for this context as institutions (including nonprofit organisations, government entities, and private businesses) that collect and care for objects of cultural, artistic, scientific, or historical interest and make their collections or related exhibits available for public viewing. Museums that exist only in cyberspace (i.e., virtual museums) are not included.
To use the sortable tables: click on the icons at the top of each column to sort that column in alphabetical order; click again for reverse alphabetical order.

Museums
Eastern Cape
Free State
Gauteng
KwaZulu-Natal
Limpopo
Mpumalanga
North West
Northern Cape
Western Cape
See also

List of natural history museums in South Africa
List of museums


== External links ==

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- Cape Town
- Knysna
- Hermanus
- Mossel Bay
- Cape Winelands

## Famous Museums
- Iziko South African Museum, Cape Town
- Robben Island Museum, Cape Town
- National Museum of Anthropology, Johannesburg
- South African National Maritime Museum, Cape Town
- Iziko Museums, Cape Town

## Local Desserts
- Bobotie
- Bobotie Pie
- Malgas (Mango Pudding)
- Bobotie (dessert)
- Bobotie (dessert)
