--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Montenegro
FILE_NAME: country_montenegro.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:48:19
----------------

# Montenegro

## General Overview
Montenegro is a country in Southeast Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula. Its 25 municipalities have a total population of 633,158 people in an area of 13,883 km2 (5,360 sq mi). It is bordered by Serbia to the northeast, Bosnia and Herzegovina to the northwest, Kosovo to the east, Albania to the southeast, and Croatia to the west, and has a coastline along the Adriatic Sea to the southwest. The capital and largest city is Podgorica, while Cetinje is the Old Royal Capital and cultural centre.
Before the arrival of the Slav peoples in the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries CE, the area now known as Montenegro was inhabited principally by people known as Illyrians.
During the Early Medieval period, three principalities were located on the territory of modern-day Montenegro: Duklja, roughly corresponding to the southern half; Travunia, the west; and Rascia proper, the north. The Principality of Zeta emerged in the 14th and 15th centuries. From the late 14th century to the late 18th century, large parts of southern Montenegro were ruled by the Venetian Republic and incorporated into Venetian Albania. The name Montenegro was first used to refer to the country in the late 15th century. After falling under Ottoman Empire rule, Montenegro gained semi-autonomy in 1696 under the rule of the House of Petrović-Njegoš, first as a theocracy and later as a secular principality. Montenegro's independence was recognised by the Great Powers at the Congress of Berlin in 1878. In 1910, the country became a kingdom. After World War I, the kingdom became part of Yugoslavia. Following the breakup of Yugoslavia, the republics of Serbia and Montenegro together proclaimed a federation. In June 2006 Montenegro declared its independence following a referendum.
Montenegro has an upper-middle-income economy, mostly service-based, and is in late transition to a market economy. It is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the World Trade Organization, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Council of Europe, and the Central European Free Trade Agreement. Montenegro is also a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean, and has been in the process of joining the European Union since 2012.

Etymology
Montenegro's (  MON-tin-E(E)G-roh, -⁠AY-groh; Montenegrin: Crna Gora / Црна Гора; Albanian: Mali i Zi) English name is a literal translation from a Venetian calque of the Montenegrin phrase "Crna Gora", or "Black Mountain", deriving from the appearance of Mount Lovćen, which was covered in dense evergreen forests. Crna Gora was mentioned for the first time in edicts issued by Stefan Uroš I to the Serbian Orthodox Zeta Episcopate seat at Vranjina island in Lake Skadar. It came to denote the majority of contemporary Montenegro in the 15th century.

Modern-day Montenegro was more and more known by that name in the historical period following the fall of the Serbian Despotate in 1459. Originally, it had referred to only a small strip of land under the rule of the Paštrovići tribe, but the name eventually came to be used for the wider mountainous region after the Crnojević noble family took power in Upper Zeta. The aforementioned region became known as Stara Crna Gora 'Old Montenegro' by the 19th century to distinguish the independent region from the neighbouring Ottoman-occupied Montenegrin territory of Brda (the "Highlands"). Montenegro further increased its size several times by the 20th century, as the result of wars against the Ottoman Empire, which saw the annexation of Old Herzegovina and parts of Metohija and southern Raška. Its borders have changed little since then, losing Metohija and gaining the Bay of Kotor.
After the second session of the AVNOJ during World War II in Yugoslavia, the contemporary modern state of Montenegro was founded as the Federal State of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Савезна држава Црне Горе / Savezna država Crne Gore) on 15 November 1943 within the Yugoslav Federation by the ZAVNOCGB. After the war, Montenegro became a republic under its name, the People's Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Народна Република Црна Гора / Narodna Republika Crna Gora) on 29 November 1945. In 1963, it was renamed to the Socialist Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Социјалистичка Република Црна Гора / Socijalistička Republika Crna Gora). As the breakup of Yugoslavia occurred, the SRCG was renamed to the Republic of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Република Црна Гора / Republika Crna Gora) on 27 April 1992 within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by removing the adjective "socialist" from the republic's title. Since 22 October 2007, a year after its independence, the name of the country became simply known as Montenegro. The country is known as Mali i Zi (lit. black mountain) in Albanian, while it is known as Crna Gora in Montenegrin, Serbian, Bosnian, and Croatian.

History
Antiquity
Modern-day Montenegro was part of Illyria and populated by the Indo-European-speaking Illyrians. The Illyrian kingdom was conquered by the Roman Republic in the Illyro-Roman Wars and the region was incorporated into the province of Illyricum (later Dalmatia and Praevalitana).

Arrival of the Slavs
Three principalities were located on the territory: Duklja, roughly corresponding to the southern half, Travunia, the west, and Raška, the north. Duklja gained its independence from the Byzantine Roman Empire in 1042. Over the next few decades, it expanded its territory to neighbouring Rascia and Bosnia, and also became recognised as a kingdom. Its power started declining at the beginning of the 12th century. After King Bodin's death (in 1101 or 1108), civil wars ensued. Duklja reached its zenith under Vojislav's son, Mihailo (1046–1081), and his grandson Constantine Bodin (1081–1101).

As the nobility fought for the throne, the kingdom was weakened, and by 1186, the territory of modern-day Montenegro became part of the state ruled by Stefan Nemanja and was a part of various state formations ruled by the Nemanjić dynasty for the next two centuries. After the Serbian Empire collapsed in the second half of the 14th century, the most powerful Zetan family, the Balšićs, became sovereigns of Zeta.
By the 13th century, Zeta had replaced Duklja when referring to the realm. In the late 14th century, southern Montenegro (Zeta) came under the rule of the Balšić noble family, then the Crnojević noble family, and by the 15th century, Zeta was more often referred to as Crna Gora.
In 1421, Zeta was annexed to the Serbian Despotate, but after 1455, another noble family from Zeta, the Crnojevićs, became sovereign rulers of the country, making it the last free monarchy of the Balkans before it fell to the Ottomans in 1496, and got annexed to the sanjak of Shkodër. For a short time, Montenegro existed as a separate autonomous sanjak in 1514–1528 (Sanjak of Montenegro). Also, Old Herzegovina region was part of Sanjak of Herzegovina.

Early modern period
From 1392, numerous parts of the territory were controlled by Republic of Venice, including the city of Budva, in that time known as "Budua". 
The Venetian territory was centred on the Bay of Kotor, and the Republic introduced governors who meddled in Montenegrin politics. Venice controlled territories in present-day Montenegro until its fall in 1797.
Large portions fell under the control of the Ottoman Empire from 1496 to 1878. In the 16th century, Montenegro developed a unique form of autonomy within the Ottoman Empire that permitted Montenegrin clans freedom from certain restrictions. Nevertheless, the Montenegrins were disgruntled with Ottoman rule, and in the 17th century, repeatedly rebelled, which culminated in the defeat of the Ottomans in the Great Turkish War at the end of that century.

Montenegrin territories were controlled by warlike clans. Most clans had a chieftain (knez), who was not permitted to assume the title unless he proved to be as worthy a leader as his predecessor. An assembly of Montenegrin clans (Zbor) was held every year on 12 July in Cetinje, and any adult clansman could take part. In 1515, Montenegro became a theocracy led by the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral, which flourished after the Petrović-Njegoš of Cetinje became the prince-bishop (whose title was "Vladika of Montenegro").
People from Montenegro in this historical period were described as Orthodox Serbs.

Principality and Kingdom of Montenegro
In 1858, one of the major Montenegrin victories over the Ottomans occurred at the Battle of Grahovac. Grand Duke Mirko Petrović, elder brother of Knjaz Danilo, led an army of 7,500 and defeated the numerically superior Ottomans with 15,000 troops at Grahovac on 1 May 1858. This forced the Great Powers to officially demarcate the borders between Montenegro and Ottoman Empire, de facto recognising Montenegro's independence.
In the Battle of Vučji Do Montenegrins inflicted a major defeat on the Ottoman Army under Grand Vizier Ahmed Muhtar Pasha. In the aftermath of the Russian victory against the Ottoman Empire in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878, the major powers restructured the map of the Balkan region. The Ottoman Empire recognised the independence of Montenegro in the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.
The first Montenegrin constitution (also known as the Danilo Code) was proclaimed in 1855. Under Nicholas I (ruled 1860–1918), the principality was enlarged several times in the Montenegro-Turkish Wars and was recognised as independent in 1878. Nicholas I established diplomatic relations with the Ottoman Empire. Minor border skirmishes excepted, diplomacy ushered in about 30 years of peace between the two states until the deposition of Abdul Hamid II in 1909.
The political skills of Abdul Hamid II and Nicholas I played a major role in the mutually amicable relations. Modernization of the state followed, culminating with the draft of a Constitution in 1905. However, political rifts emerged between the reigning People's Party, who supported the process of democratisation and union with Serbia, and those of the True People's Party, who were monarchist.
In 1910, Montenegro became a kingdom, and as a result of the Balkan Wars of 1912–1913, a common border with Serbia was established, with Shkodër being awarded to Albania, though the current capital city of Montenegro, Podgorica, was on the old border of Albania and Yugoslavia. Montenegro became one of the Allied Powers during World War I (1914–1918). In the Battle of Mojkovac fought in January 1916 between Austria-Hungary and the Kingdom of Montenegro, Montenegrins achieved a decisive victory even though they were outnumbered five to one, however this was not enough to prevent Montenegro's defeat, and the Austro-Hungarians accepted a military surrender on 25 January 1916. From 1916 to October 1918 Austria-Hungary occupied Montenegro. During the occupation, King Nicholas fled the country and established a government-in-exile in Bordeaux.

Kingdom of Yugoslavia
In 1922, Montenegro formally became the Oblast of Cetinje in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, with the addition of the coastal areas around Budva and Bay of Kotor. In a further restructuring in 1929, it became a part of a larger Zeta Banate of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia that reached the Neretva River.
Nicholas's grandson, the Serb King Alexander I, dominated the Yugoslav government. Zeta Banovina was one of nine banovinas that formed the kingdom; it consisted of the present-day Montenegro and parts of Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia.

World War II and Socialist Yugoslavia
In April 1941, Nazi Germany, the Kingdom of Italy, and other Axis allies attacked and occupied the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Italian forces occupied Montenegro and established a puppet Kingdom of Montenegro.

In May, the Montenegrin branch of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia started preparations for an uprising planned for mid-July. The Communist Party and its Youth League organised 6,000 of its members into detachments prepared for guerrilla warfare. According to some historians, the first armed uprising in Nazi-occupied Europe happened on 13 July 1941 in Montenegro.
Unexpectedly, the uprising took hold, and by 20 July, 32,000 men and women had joined the fight. Except for the coast and major towns (Podgorica, Cetinje, Pljevlja, and Nikšić), which were besieged, Montenegro was mostly liberated. In a month of fighting, the Italian army suffered 5,000 dead, wounded, and captured. The uprising lasted until mid-August, when it was suppressed by a counter-offensive of 67,000 Italian troops brought in from Albania. Faced with new and overwhelming Italian forces, many of the fighters laid down their arms and returned home. Nevertheless, intense guerrilla fighting lasted until December.
Fighters who remained under arms fractured into two groups. Most of them went on to join the Yugoslav Partisans, consisting of communists and those inclined towards active resistance; these included Arso Jovanović, Sava Kovačević, Svetozar Vukmanović-Tempo, Milovan Đilas, Peko Dapčević, Vlado Dapčević, Veljko Vlahović, and Blažo Jovanović. Those loyal to the Karađorđević dynasty and opposing communism went on to become Chetniks, and turned to collaboration with Italians against the Partisans.
War broke out between Partisans and Chetniks during the first half of 1942. Pressured by Italians and Chetniks, the core of the Montenegrin Partisans went to Serbia and Bosnia, where they joined with other Yugoslav Partisans. Fighting between Partisans and Chetniks continued through the war. Chetniks with Italian backing controlled most of the country from mid-1942 to April 1943. Montenegrin Chetniks received the status of "anti-communist militia" and received weapons, ammunition, food rations, and money from Italy. Most of them were moved to Mostar, where they fought in the Battle of Neretva against the Partisans, but were dealt a heavy defeat.
During German operation Schwarz against the Partisans in May and June 1943, Germans disarmed many Chetniks without fighting, as they feared they would turn against them in case of an Allied invasion of the Balkans. After the capitulation of Italy in September 1943, Partisans managed to take hold of most of Montenegro for a brief time, but Montenegro was soon occupied by German forces, and fierce fighting continued during late 1943 and 1944. Montenegro was liberated by the Partisans in December 1944.
Montenegro became one of the six constituent republics of the communist Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY). Its capital became Podgorica, renamed Titograd in honour of President Josip Broz Tito. After the war, the infrastructure of Yugoslavia was rebuilt, industrialization began, and the University of Montenegro was established. Greater autonomy was established until the Socialist Republic of Montenegro ratified a new constitution in 1974.

Montenegro within FR Yugoslavia
After the formal dissolution of the SFRY in 1992, Montenegro remained part of a smaller Federal Republic of Yugoslavia along with Serbia. In the referendum on remaining in Yugoslavia in 1992, 96% of the votes cast were in favour of the federation with Serbia. The referendum was boycotted by opposition parties such as the Liberal Alliance of Montenegro, the Social Democratic and Socialist Parties, as well as minority parties such as the Democratic League in Montenegro, leading to a relatively low turnout of 66%.

During the 1991–1995 Bosnian War and Croatian War, Montenegrin police and military forces, under orders of president Momir Bulatovic and Interior Minister Pavle Bulatovic joined Serbian troops in attacks on Dubrovnik, Croatia. These operations, aimed at acquiring more territory, were characterised by large-scale violations of human rights.
Montenegrin General Pavle Strugar was convicted for his part in the bombing of Dubrovnik. Bosnian refugees were arrested by Montenegrin police and transported to Serb camps in Foča, where they were subjected to systematic torture and executed.
In 1996, Milo Đukanović's government severed ties between Montenegro and its partner Serbia, which was led by Slobodan Milošević. Montenegro formed its own economic policy and adopted the German Deutsche Mark as its currency and subsequently adopted the euro, although not part of the Eurozone. Subsequent governments pursued pro-independence policies, and political tensions with Serbia simmered despite political changes in Belgrade.
Targets in Montenegro were bombed by NATO forces during Operation Allied Force in 1999, although the extent of these attacks was limited in both time and area affected.
In 2002, Serbia and Montenegro came to a new agreement for continued cooperation and entered into negotiations regarding the future status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This resulted in the Belgrade Agreement, which saw the country's transformation into a more decentralised state union named Serbia and Montenegro in 2003. The Belgrade Agreement also contained a provision delaying any future referendum on the independence of Montenegro for at least three years.

Independence
The status of the union between Montenegro and Serbia was decided by a referendum on Montenegrin independence on 21 May 2006. A total of 419,240 votes were cast, representing 86.5% of the electorate; 230,661 votes (55.5%) were for independence and 185,002 votes (44.5%) were against. This narrowly surpassed the 55% threshold needed to validate the referendum under the rules set by the European Union. According to the electoral commission, the 55% threshold was passed by only 2,300 votes. Serbia, the member-states of the European Union, and the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council all recognised Montenegro's independence.
The 2006 referendum was monitored by five international observer missions, headed by an OSCE/ODIHR team, and around 3,000 observers in total (including domestic observers from CDT (OSCE PA), the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe (CLRAE), and the European Parliament (EP) to form an International Referendum Observation Mission (IROM). The IROM—in its preliminary report—"assessed compliance of the referendum process with OSCE commitments, Council of Europe commitments, other international standards for democratic electoral processes, and domestic legislation." Furthermore, the report stated that the competitive pre-referendum environment was marked by an active and generally peaceful campaign and that "there were no reports of restrictions on fundamental civil and political rights".
On 3 June 2006, the Montenegrin Parliament declared the independence of Montenegro, formally confirming the result of the referendum.
On 28 June 2006, Montenegro joined the United Nations as its 192nd member state.
Montenegro has been dominated since the breakup of Yugoslavia by Milo Đukanović (four-time prime minister and twice president), accused of having established an authoritarian and clientelist regime, while maintaining close relations with organized crime. The massive privatizations of the Đukanović era lead to the enrichment of him and oligarchs close to him. His brother Aleksandar, owner of Montenegro's first private bank, oversaw the privatizations, while his sister, Ana Kolarevic, has long controlled the judiciary. The clientelist networks of the ruling party dominated all segments of social life. A party card was required to start a business or obtain a position in the administration. This policy also contributed to the reinforcement of regional disparities and social inequalities. Unemployment climbs to 36.6 per cent in the northern part of the country, compared to 3.9 per cent in the coastal region, while a quarter of the population lives below the poverty line (2018).
The Law on the Status of the Descendants of the Petrović Njegoš Dynasty was passed by the Parliament of Montenegro on 12 July 2011. It rehabilitated the Royal House of Montenegro and recognised limited symbolic roles within the constitutional framework of the republic.
In 2015, the investigative journalists' network OCCRP named Montenegro's long-time President and Prime Minister Milo Đukanović "Person of the Year in Organized Crime". The extent of Đukanović's corruption led to street demonstrations and calls for his removal.
In October 2016, for the day of the parliamentary election, a coup d'état was prepared by a group of persons that included leaders of the Montenegrin opposition, Serbian nationals and Russian agents; the coup was prevented. In 2017, fourteen people, including two Russian nationals and two Montenegrin opposition leaders, Andrija Mandić and Milan Knežević, were indicted for their alleged roles in the coup attempt on charges such as "preparing a conspiracy against the constitutional order and the security of Montenegro" and an "attempted terrorist act".

Recent history
Montenegro formally became a member of NATO in June 2017, despite attempts by Russia to sabotage it, an event that triggered a promise of retaliatory actions from Russia's government.

Montenegro has been in negotiations with the EU since 2012. In 2018, the earlier goal of acceding by 2022 was revised to 2025. As of 2024, all 33 negotiation chapters had been opened, with three provisionally closed. Legislation is being passed bringing Montenegro law in line with EU membership requirements.
In April 2018, Milo Đukanović, the leader of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), won Montenegro's presidential election. The veteran politician had served as Prime Minister six times and as president once before. He had dominated Montenegrin politics since 1991.
Anti-corruption protests began in February 2019 against Đukanović and the Prime Minister Duško Marković-led government of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), which had been in power since 1991.
As of late December 2019, the newly adopted Law on Religion, which de jure transferred the ownership of church buildings and estates built before 1918 from the Serbian Orthodox Church to the Montenegrin state, sparked large protests and road blockages. Seventeen opposition Democratic Front MPs were arrested prior to the voting for disrupting the vote. Demonstrations continued into March 2020 as peaceful protest walks, mostly organised by the Serbian Orthodox Church in the majority of Montenegrin municipalities.
In its political rights and civil liberties worldwide report in May 2020, Freedom House marked Montenegro as a hybrid regime rather than a democracy because of declining standards in governance, justice, elections, and media freedom. For the first time in three decades, in the 2020 parliamentary election, the opposition won more votes than Đukanović's ruling party. In February 2022, that very same government was voted out in the first successful vote of no-confidence in the country's history.
In September 2022, an investigation linked six Russian diplomats with twenty eight Russian citizens holding temporary visas for Montenegro and two local citizens in a spy investigation. The diplomats were expelled. The Russian citizens were later banned from Montenegro and the two locals, one an ex-diplomat, face charges of illegal weapons, organising a criminal organisation and espionage.
In March 2023, Jakov Milatovic, a pro-western candidate of the Europe Now movement, won the presidential election run-off over incumbent Milo Đukanović to succeed him as the incumbent president of Montenegro. The Europe Now movement won the highest number of seats in the 2023 Montenegrin parliamentary election. On 31 October 2023,  Milojko Spajic of the Europe Now Movement became Montenegro's new prime minister, leading a coalition of  both pro-European and pro-Serb parties.
The Parliament of Montenegro in June 2024 adopted a resolution acknowledging the atrocities committed at the Jasenovac concentration camp during World War II. This decision, spearheaded by pro-Serbian factions, is viewed as a response to Montenegro's earlier support for a UN resolution on the Srebrenica genocide. Croatia has criticized the move, accusing Montenegro of politicizing historical events and warned that it could harm Montenegro's path to EU membership and bilateral relations between Croatia and Montenegro. The resolution has led to increased diplomatic tensions between the two nations.
In 2024, Montenegro was one of 22 countries with a Global Hunger Index score of less than 5.

Geography
Montenegro features high peaks along its borders with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and Serbia. Its geography also includes a segment of the karst of the western Balkan Peninsula, to a narrow coastal plain that is only 1.5 to 6 kilometres (1 to 4 miles) wide. The plain stops abruptly in the north, where Mount Lovćen and Mount Orjen plunge into the inlet of the Bay of Kotor.
Montenegro's large karst region lies generally at elevations of 1,000 metres (3,280 ft) above sea level; some parts, however, rise to 2,000 m (6,560 ft), such as Mount Orjen 1,894 metres (6,210 ft), the highest massif among the coastal limestone ranges. The Zeta River valley, at an elevation of 500 m (1,600 ft), is the lowest segment.
The mountains of Montenegro include some of the most rugged terrains in Europe, averaging more than 2,000 metres (6,600 feet) in elevation. One of the country's notable peaks is Bobotov Kuk in the Durmitor mountains, which reaches a height of 2,522 metres (8,270 ft) and was previously thought to be the country's highest point. In 2018, new triangulation measurements showed that Zla Kolata in the Prokletije mountains, which reaches a height of 2,534 metres (8,310 ft). Owing to the hyperhumid climate on their western sides, the Montenegrin mountain ranges were among the most ice-eroded parts of the Balkan Peninsula during the last glacial period.
Internationally, Montenegro borders Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Albania and Croatia. It lies between latitudes 41° and 44°N, and longitudes 18° and 21°E.
Montenegro has many national parks, making it important for its biodiversity. The national parks include: the Durmitor National Park (1952), having an area of 390 square kilometres (39,000 ha), is also a massif. Located in the Dinaric Alps, the Belgrade–Bar railway crosses the mountains in it; the Biogradska Gora National Park (1952), spans to 54 square kilometres (5,400 ha), being as well a forest, the park was recognised as one of the UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves; the Lovćen National Park (1952) is located in southwestern Montenegro, it is the inspiration behind the names of Montenegro and Crna Gora, the area is 64 square kilometres (6,400 ha); the Lake Skadar National Park (1983) is a big lake lying on the Albania-Montenegro border, the national park measure approximately 400 square kilometres (40,000 ha); the Prokletije National Park (2009) is a mountain range including the second tallest mountain of Montenegro, the park have an area of 166 square kilometres (16,600 ha).
Montenegro is a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River, as more than 2,000 km2 (772 sq mi) of the country's territory lie within the Danube catchment area.

Biodiversity
The diversity of the geological base, landscape, climate, and soil, and the position of Montenegro on the Balkan Peninsula and Adriatic Sea, created the conditions for high biological diversity, putting Montenegro among the "hot-spots" of European and world biodiversity. The number of species per area unit index in Montenegro is 0.837, the highest in any European country.
Biological estimates suggest that over 1,200 species of freshwater algae, 300 species of marine algae, 589 species of moss, 7,000–8,000 species of vascular plants, 2,000 species of fungi, 16,000–20,000 species of insects, 407 species of marine fish, 56 species of reptile, 333 species of regularly visiting birds and a high species diversity of mammals are found in Montenegro.
Montenegro can be divided into two main biogeographic regions, which include the Mediterranean Biogeographic Region and the Alpine Biogeographic Region. It is also home to three terrestrial ecoregions: Balkan mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests, and Illyrian deciduous forests. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.41/10, ranking it 73rd globally out of 172 countries.
The total share of protected areas in Montenegro is 9.05% of the country's area, which mainly comes from the five national parks of Montenegro.

Politics
Montenegro is a parliamentary representative democratic republic with a codified constitution established in 2007. The constitution describes Montenegro as a "civic, democratic, ecological state of social justice, based on the reign of Law". Montenegro is a multi-party system.
The President of Montenegro is the representative head of state, elected for a period of five years through direct election. The President promotes the country internationally through diplomatic engagements, promulgates laws by ordinance, calls elections for the Parliament, and ceremonially proposes candidates for Prime Minister, president and justices of the Constitutional Court to the Parliament. The President also ceremonially proposes the calling of a referendum to Parliament, grants amnesty for criminal offences proscribed by the national law, confers decoration and awards and performs other constitutional duties and is a member of the Supreme Defence Council. The official residence of the President is in Cetinje. The incumbent president is Jakov Milatović who has held the position since May 2023.
The Government of Montenegro is the executive branch of government authority of Montenegro and led by the Prime Minister. The role of Prime Minister is the most politically powerful office in Montenegro. All of Montenegro's governments since 2006 have been coalitions comprising a minimum of three political parties. The government is primarily based in Podgorica.
The Parliament of Montenegro is the country's unicameral legislature, located in Podgorica. The Parliament has power to appoint the government, pass legislation (parliamentary law) and scrutinise bills (proposed parliamentary law). It also appoints justices of all courts, approves the budget and performs other duties as established by the country's Constitution. Parliament can pass a motion of no confidence in the Government by simple majority vote. One member of the Montenegrin parliament, known as a Deputy, is elected per 6,000 voters. There are currently 81 deputies. Elections to the Parliament are conducted by the D'Hondt method, a form of proportional representation.
According to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Montenegro performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in absence of corruption and judicial independence. In 2019, Montenegro was described as a hybrid regime (a political system which combines democratic and authoritarian features) according to the United States–based Freedom House. The organisation cited state capture, abuse of power, and strongman tactics by Prime Minister Milo Đukanović (2008–2010 and 2012–2016) as explanations for its description as such. Đukanović held a number of senior government positions, including the Presidency, before and after the dissolution of the union between Serbia and Montenegro. Similarly the Economist Democracy Index (EDI) considers Montenegro to be a "flawed democracy": since it was first published, the EDI ranked Montenegro as a "flawed democracy" from 2006–2015, downgrading it to a "hybrid regime" between 2016–2020, before reinstating it to "flawed democracy" in 2021 where, as of 2024, it remains.
Đukanović's pro-European and pro-NATO Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) narrowly lost the 2020 parliamentary election which ended the party's 30-year rule and the pro-Serbia "For the Future of Montenegro" (ZBCG) parliamentary group, composed mainly of Serb nationalist parties, formed a government under Prime Minister Zdravko Krivokapic. Prime Minister Krivokapic's government was toppled in a no-confidence vote after just 14 months in power.
In April 2022, a new minority government, led by Prime Minister Dritan Abazović, brought together moderate parties that are both pro-European and pro-Serb. However, his government lost a confidence vote after only 113 days. Since Montenegro had been unable to find a government which could command the confidence of the Parliament, Abazović remained in his post until the Spajić Cabinet had been formed after the Parliamentary election which took place on 11 June 2023, where the Europe Now! party led by Milojko Spajić won the most seats. In October 2023, a new minority government with confidence and supply support from ZBCG enabled Milojko Spajić to become the new prime minister.

Administrative divisions
Montenegro is divided into twenty-five municipalities (opština). Each municipality can contain multiple cities and towns. Historically, the territory of the country was divided into nahije and during the beginning of SR Montenegro was divided into counties (srez).
Regions of Montenegro—designed for statistical purposes by the Statistical Office—have no administrative function. Note that other organizations (i.e. Football Association of Montenegro) use different municipalities as a part of similar regions.

Northern Region

Central Region

Coastal Region

Foreign relations
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was given the task of defining the foreign policy priorities and activities needed for their implementation in cooperation with other state administration authorities, the President, the Speaker of the Parliament, and other relevant stakeholders.
The country joined NATO on 5 June 2017. Integration into the European Union remains a high-priority for Montenegro and has been the focus of Montenegrin foreign policy since its independence from Serbia. In June 2023, newly elected President Milatović stated that he expects Montenegro to join the European Union by 2027 or 2028.
In April 2026, the EU Ambassadors in Brussels approved the start of preparations for the accession agreement for Montenegro to the Union.

Law
The current Constitution of Montenegro was ratified and adopted by the Constitutional Parliament of Montenegro on 19 October 2007 in a session by achieving the required two-thirds supermajority of votes. It was officially proclaimed on 22 October 2007.
The Constitution defines Montenegro as a civic, democratic and environmentally friendly country with social justice, established by the sovereign rights of its government.
The judiciary in Montenegro is composed of several courts, with the Supreme Court being the highest judicial authority. It oversees the uniform application of laws. Administrative Courts handle disputes related to public administration. The judiciary also includes Basic Courts (for minor civil and criminal cases), High Courts (for more serious cases and appeals), and the Appellate Court for reviewing lower court decisions.
The Constitutional Court of Montenegro is a separate body, tasked with safeguarding the constitution by reviewing laws and acts of public authorities to ensure their compliance with the Constitution.
Judges in Montenegro are appointed by the Judicial Council and serve until the age of 67. The President of Montenegro appoints judges upon the recommendation of the Judicial Council. Additionally, the Protector of Human Rights and Freedoms of Montenegro (Ombudsman) is appointed by the Parliament for a six-year term, ensuring the protection of human rights and social justice.
Discrimination on the basis of both sexual orientation and gender identity is banned in employment, the provision of goods and services, education and health services. Montenegro also possesses hate crime and hate speech laws which include sexual orientation and gender identity as grounds of non-discrimination.
Since 15 July 2021, same-sex couples may register their relationship as a Life Partnership.

Law enforcement, security and emergency services
Law enforcement in Montenegro is carried out by several agencies under the Ministry of Interior. 
Civil law enforcement in Montenegro is primarily the responsibility of the Police Directorate, the national police force. Municipal police, known as Communal Police, enforce local laws in their respective municipalities.
Law enforcement in Montenegro is carried out by several agencies under the Ministry of Interior. 
The primary law enforcement body is the Montenegrin Police Directorate, responsible for crime investigation, maintaining public order, and general law enforcement. The Municipal Police assist with local law enforcement tasks, primarily focusing on traffic regulation and minor public order issues.
Private security firms operate in Montenegro but have no legal authority to arrest or detain suspects.
The National Security Agency (ANB) is responsible for counterintelligence and internal security, while Interpol Montenegro collaborates with international agencies to counter transnational crime. Special units within the police, such as the Special Anti-Terrorist Unit (SAJ), handle organized crime, terrorism, and high-risk operations.
An agreement signed with the EU effective July 2023 permits EU Frontex border management personnel to operate in Montenegro in support of local border police operating on other, non EU, borders in Montenegro.
Emergency services in Montenegro include medical services, firefighters, and search and rescue units, which are coordinated by the Directorate for Emergency Situations. Emergency medical services are operated by local health institutions but are overseen by the Ministry of Health.

Military
The military of Montenegro consist of three professional service branches: the Montenegrin Ground Army, the Montenegrin Navy and the Montenegrin Air Force. The armed forces of Montenegro are managed by the Ministry of Defence, and controlled by the Chief of the General Staff. The President of Montenegro is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, to whom members of the forces swear an oath of allegiance. The Armed Forces are charged with protecting Montenegro, promoting the global security interests and supporting international peacekeeping efforts.
Montenegro is a NATO member and a member of Adriatic Charter. The government planned to have the army participate in peacekeeping missions through the UN and NATO such as the International Security Assistance Force.
Montenegro is the 35th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

Economy
The economy of Montenegro is mostly service-based and is in late transition to a market economy. According to the International Monetary Fund, the nominal GDP of Montenegro was $5.424 billion in 2019. The GDP PPP for 2019 was $12.516 billion, or $20,083 per capita. According to Eurostat data, the Montenegrin GDP per capita stood at 48% of the EU average in 2018.
Montenegro joined the Central European Free Trade Agreement in 2007 and has a free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association since 2012. The Central Bank of Montenegro is not part of the euro system but the country is "euroised", using the euro unilaterally as its currency. Montenegro was ranked 64th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, up from 75th in 2023.

Infrastructure
The Montenegrin road infrastructure is not at Western European standards. No roads meet full motorway standards. Construction of new motorways is considered a national priority, as they are important for uniform economic development and the development of Montenegro as an attractive tourist destination.
The European routes that pass through Montenegro are E65 and E80.
The backbone of the Montenegrin rail network is the Belgrade–Bar railway, which provides international connection towards Serbia. A domestic branch line, the Nikšić-Podgorica railway, operated as a freight-only line for decades, that opened for passenger traffic after reconstruction and electrification in 2012. The other branch line from Podgorica towards the Albanian border, the Podgorica–Shkodër railway, is not in use.
Montenegro has two international airports, Podgorica Airport and Tivat Airport.
The Port of Bar is Montenegro's main seaport. Initially built in 1906, the port was almost completely destroyed during World War II. Reconstruction began in 1950. It is equipped to handle over five million tons of cargo annually, but has been operating at a loss and well below capacity. The reconstruction of the Belgrade-Bar railway and the proposed Belgrade-Bar motorway are expected to return operating levels to capacity.
In 2023 there is a plan to install an LNG terminal at Bar to receive gas imports.

Tourism
A total of 2.1 million visitors visited Montenegro in 2022 spending 12.4m nights there. The majority of foreign visitors to Montenegro come from the neighbouring countries of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, as well as Russia.
The Montenegrin Adriatic coast is 295 km (183 mi) long, with 72 km (45 mi) of beaches and many well-preserved ancient towns. Some of the most popular beaches include Jaz Beach, Mogren Beach, Bečići Beach, Sveti Stefan Beach and Velika Plaža. Meanwhile, some of the most popular ancient towns include Herceg Novi, Perast, Kotor, Budva and Ulcinj.
National Geographic Traveler (edited once a decade) ranks Montenegro among the "50 Places of a Lifetime". Montenegrin seaside town Sveti Stefan was once used as the cover for the magazine. The coast region of Montenegro was considered one of the great "discoveries" among world tourists. In January 2010, The New York Times ranked the Ulcinj South Coast region of Montenegro, including Velika Plaža, Ada Bojana, and the Hotel Mediteran of Ulcinj, among the "Top 31 Places to Go in 2010" as part of a worldwide ranking.

Demographics
Ethnic structure
The 2023 census reported 623,633 citizens. Montenegro is a multiethnic state with no ethnic majority. Montenegrins make up 41.1% of the population, Serbs 32.9%, Bosniaks 9.45%, Albanians 4.99%, and Russians 2.01%. There is a significant number of other ethnic groups, including Romani people, Croats, Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Turks.

Languages
The official language in Montenegro is Montenegrin. Serbian, Bosnian, Albanian, and Croatian are recognised in official usage. Montenegrin, Serbian, Bosnian, and Croatian are mutually intelligible as standard varieties of the Serbo-Croatian language. Serbian is the most spoken language in the country, as a plurality of the population at 43.18% consider it as their native language, while 34.52% speaks the Montenegrin language. There is also significant number of people speaking Bosnian (6.98%), Albanian (5.25%), and Russian (2.36%).

Religion
Montenegro has historically stood at the crossroads of multiculturalism, and over centuries this has shaped its unique co-existence between its Christian and Muslim populations. Montenegrins have throughout history been Eastern Orthodox Christians that are members of the Serbian Orthodox Church, which is governed by the Metropolitanate of Montenegro and the Littoral and the Eparchy of Budimlja and Nikšić. Eastern Orthodox Christianity is the predominant religion in Montenegro, with 71.1% of the population adhering to the religion. Meanwhile, the Serbian Orthodox Church is the largest and most popular church, with approximately 90% of Orthodox Christians in Montenegro following the church. A schismatic church called The Montenegrin Orthodox Church, which broke off from the Serbian Orthodox church in 1993, is followed by the remaining 10% of Orthodox Christians in the country. It also has not been officially recognised by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and is not in communion with any other canonical Orthodox Christian Church.
Despite tensions between religious groups during the Bosnian War, Montenegro remained fairly stable, mainly due to its population's perspective on religious tolerance and faith diversity. Religious institutions have guaranteed rights and are separate from the state. The second largest religion is Islam, practiced by 19% of the population. Montenegro has one of the highest proportion of Muslims in Europe and the third highest proportion among Slavic countries, behind only Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia. A little more than one-fourth of the country's Albanians are Catholics (8,085 in the 2023 census) while the rest (22,520) are mainly Sunni Muslims; in 2012 a protocol recognised Islam as an official religion, which ensures that halal foods are served at military facilities, hospitals, dormitories and social facilities; and that Muslim women are permitted to wear headscarves in schools and at public institutions, as well as ensuring that Muslims have the right to take Fridays off for the Jumu'ah (Friday)-prayer. Since the time of Vojislavljević dynasty Catholicism is autochthonous in the Montenegrin area. A small Roman Catholic population, mostly Albanians with some Croats, is divided between the Archdiocese of Antivari headed by the Primate of Serbia and the Diocese of Kotor that is a part of the Catholic Church in Croatia.

Culture
Montenegrin culture has been shaped most importantly by Orthodox, Ottoman (Turk), Slavic, Central European, and seafaring Adriatic cultures (notably parts of Italy, like the Republic of Venice).
Montenegro has many significant cultural and historical sites, including heritage sites from the pre-Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque periods. The Montenegrin coastal region is known for its religious monuments, including the Cathedral of Saint Tryphon in Kotor (Cattaro under the Venetians), the basilica of St. Luke (over 800 years), Our Lady of the Rocks (Škrpjela), the Savina Monastery and others. Medieval monasteries contain many artistically important frescoes.
One cultural dimension is the ethical ideal of Čojstvo i Junaštvo, "Humaneness and Gallantry". The traditional folk dance of the Montenegrins is the Oro, the "eagle dance" that involves dancing in circles with couples alternating in the centre, and is finished by forming a human pyramid of dancers standing on each other's shoulders.

Media
Television, magazines, and newspapers are operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations that depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Montenegro guarantees freedom of speech. Montenegro's media system is under transformation, along with the rest of the country. The privately owned media outlet Vijesti (News) has been the most watched in Montenegro for many years, followed by the state-owned Radio and Television of Montenegro (Radio-televizija Crne Gore, RTCG).[3]  RTCG also provides radio and television broadcasts of daily news in the Albanian language.

Sport
Sport in Montenegro revolves mostly around team sports, such as water polo, football, basketball, handball, and volleyball. Other sports involved are boxing, tennis, swimming, judo, karate, athletics, table tennis, and chess.
Water polo is the most popular and is considered the national sport. Montenegro men's national water polo team is one of the world's top ranked teams, winning the gold medal at the 2008 Men's European Water Polo Championship in Málaga, Spain, and winning the gold medal at the 2009 FINA Men's Water Polo World League, held in Podgorica. The Montenegrin team PVK Primorac from Kotor became a champion of Europe at the LEN Euroleague 2009 in Rijeka, Croatia. Montenegro came fourth in the men's water polo in the 2016 Olympics.
Football is the second most popular sport. The Montenegro national football team, founded in 2006, played in playoffs for UEFA Euro 2012, its highest play appearance. The Montenegro national basketball team is known for good performances and won many medals as part of the Yugoslavia national basketball team. In 2006, the Basketball Federation of Montenegro along with this team joined the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) on its own, following the Independence. Montenegro participated in two EuroBaskets.
Among women sports, the national handball team is the most successful, winning the country's first Olympic medal, claiming silver at the 2012 Summer Olympics. This was followed by the 2012 European Championship which Montenegro won, becoming European champions. ŽRK Budućnost Podgorica has twice won the EHF Champions League. Montenegro was one of the host countries for the 2022 European Women's Handball Championship and came third.

Cuisine
The first major influences to Montenegrin cuisine came from the Levant and Turkey: sarma, musaka, pilav, pita, gibanica, burek, ćevapi, kebab, đuveč, and Turkish sweets such as baklava and tulumba. Hungarian cuisine influences stews and sataraš. Central European cuisine is evident in the prevalence of crêpes, doughnuts, jams, many types of biscuits and cakes, and various kinds of breads. Montenegrin cuisine also varies geographically; with the cuisine in the coastal area differing from that of the northern highland region. The coastal area is traditionally a representative of Mediterranean cuisine, with seafood being a common dish. The traditional dishes of Montenegro's Adriatic coast, unlike its heartland, have been significantly influenced by Italian cuisine.

See also
Outline of Montenegro
List of endemic species of Montenegro

Notes
References
Sources
Fine, John Van Antwerp Jr. (1994) [1987]. The Late Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Late Twelfth Century to the Ottoman Conquest. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0472082604.
Pope, Stephen; Wheal, lizabeth-Anne; Robbins, Keith (2003). Dictionary of the First World War. Pen & Sword Military Classics. ISBN 9780850529791.

Further reading
Bibliographies of Montenegro
External links

Official website of the Government of Montenegro (English)
Montenegro in The World Factbook of the Central Intelligence Agency
Montenegro. Encyclopædia Britannica.
Montenegro profile from the BBC News
Montenegro from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Culture Corner – leading Montenegrin web portal for culture
Official website National Parks Montenegro
 Wikimedia Atlas of Montenegro
 Geographic data related to Montenegro at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Montenegro
Montenegro is one of the fastest-growing tourist destinations. In 2007, over a million tourists visited Montenegro, making some 7.3 million overnight stays (23% increase, compared to 2006). This accounted for some 480 million euros in tourism revenue in 2007 (39% increase, compared to previous year). In 2015, tourism realised over 1.7 million arrivals, with a further increase in 2016. In the same year, the coastal town of Kotor was named the best city to visit by Lonely Planet, whereas the country itself is continuously included in touristic top lists. With a total of 1.8 million visitors in 2016, the nation became the 36th (out of 47 countries) most popular country to travel to in Europe. Montenegro was further visited by over 2 million tourists in 2017. The Government aims to attract greenfield investments, which should make best use of undeveloped parts of the coast, such as Jaz Beach, Velika Plaža, Ada Bojana and Buljarica.
Montenegro can be presented as a destination offering a variety of attractions and all-year tourism is possible by publicizing its varied features. Therefore, the Tourism Masterplan of Montenegro is also paving the way for a national development program for nature based tourism, especially hiking and biking, with new infrastructure and services. The realisation of a 3-year-program was started in 2007.

Main points of interest
Coastal region
North Coast region
This notable coastal region is of primary interest to tourists in Montenegro. The Montenegrin Adriatic coast is 295 km long, with 72 km of beaches, and with many well-preserved ancient old towns. The main attractions along the north coast are:

The old Town of Herceg Novi
The Savina Monastery overlooking the entrance to the Bay of Kotor
The old town of Kotor, listed with UNESCO World Heritage Sites
Boka Kotorska (Bay of Kotor), with the ancient small town of Perast
Porto Montenegro – Luxury Yacht Marina in Tivat (only city on Montenegrin coast to have airport)
The old town of Budva, a well preserved old town
Sveti Stefan, a small island hamlet turned into a luxury hotel
Town Petrovac near Budva
As a part of the Institute of Marine Biology, in 2020 was established Adriatic Biodiversity Conservation Center ″Aquarium Boka″. It is the first and only public aquarium in Montenegro. It is also a unique institution in Montenegro that combines research and education to promote and practice the efficient conservation of marine wildlife and a new attraction in the tourist offer of the city of Kotor.

South Coast region
The South Coast region of Montenegro is considered one of the great new "discoveries" among world tourists. In January 2010, The New York Times ranked the Ulcinj South Coast region of Montenegro, including Velika Plaza, Ada Bojana, and the Hotel Mediteran of Ulcinj, as among the "Top 31 Places to Go in 2010" as part of a worldwide ranking of tourism destinations [1]
The South Coast region, centered in Ulcinj, is popular in part due to the "Blue Flag beach" sandy beaches, eco-adventure activities, ancient fortress-cities, and vibrant nightlife. These destinations include:

The old town of Ulcinj with its prominent battlements and Cyclopean walls, bustling nightlife and sea-side strand, and home of the Montenegro's longest pristine beach, Velika Plaza.
The old town of Bar, Montenegro with its "living museum" at Stari Bar.
Ada Bojana at the very south of Montenegro's coastline, with its famed daily fresh catch featured at the area's seafood riverside restaurants.16 km from Ulcinj.
The vast water body and wildlife reserve Skadar Lake at Ulcinj's Salt Flats, one of the largest nesting places on the European continent for migratory birds.
The pebble beach and massive olive groves at Valdanos.
The beach, sea caves and pine resin in the air at Ulcinj's Ladies Beach, that for generations locals have known promise cures for infertility and other ailments.
The only deep water harbor and commercial port in Montenegro, at Bar.
Beaches, fortresses and villages on Skadar Lake

Northern Region
The Northern Region is the centre of Montenegrin mountain tourism. It has ski resorts, and is popular for its untouched nature. The entire area of Durmitor mountain and the Tara river canyon is protected as a national park, and listed with UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
Destinations in the North:

The town of Plav and visitor summit 2211m above sea level (mountain peak) above Plav. Magnificent panoramic view of the mountains of Albania, Serbia and Montenegro. Along side Bogićevica summit 2533m and Zla Kolata summit 2535m which is the highest Peak in Montenegro. Mosque Sultanija the last Ottoman mosque in the Balkans. Plav Lake It is the largest glacial lake in Montenegro, and is also the best-known tourist attraction in the area. The Redzepagic Tower is the oldest and most interesting housing-defence facility in the city of Plav. It was built in 1671. The tower is now hosting the local ethnographic collection with more than 2000 exhibits which reach back as far as the middle ages to the present day. Hrid lake is known by locals as Fairy Lake and lake of happiness, is at 1970m and is the highest lake of Prokletijes and Montenegro. A refreshing swim best in July and August and not reachable by vehicles. Ali-Pasha's Springs (Ali Pasini Izvori) is one of the premium attractions in Prokletije National Park. The river is formed directly by outbreak from the soil, from the many small springs, a couple kilometers from Gusinje. There are multiple ethnic villages (Etno Selo) to enjoy the traditional food, herbal therapy and horse riding.
The town of Pljevlja with the coat of arms of the Đurđevića Tara Bridge over the Tara (river), the largest canyon in Europe, the second-deepest canyon in the world. The canyon is known for the attraction of countless fast springs from the rocks during rafting.
Ljubišnja triple Highland mountain chain and largest forest mountain range in Montenegro with the center in the village of Bobovo. Sandica Ubo the historic hamlet on the cliffs of the Tara river is part of the Durmitor National Park. Climbing, hiking, and photographing forested areas is a tourist practice. The habitat of wild horses is located on Horse field on Ljubisnja. Dairy products and organic food are produced by local farmers.
Municipium S ... Komini Pljevlja archaeological site from the Roman period found by Arthur Evans.
Heritage museum Pljevlja the most representative and richest museum in Montenegro with a unique piece of Cage cup.
Monastery of the Holy Trinity near Pljevlja is famous as a place of pilgrimage known as a monastery for which a very famous medieval Enlightenment fraternity has guarded the bishop's scepter and a chest with holy bridges of one hand of Saint Sava for centuries which were moved to Church of Saint Sava.
Husein-paša's Mosque in Pljevlja with the famous blue artistic arabesque on the ceiling of the tallest dome of the mosque and with the tallest minaret (42m) in the Balkans.
Monumental memorial complex dedicated to the partisan fighters killed during the Battle of Pljevlja, the tallest monument to the anti-fascist movement in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Memorial monument dedicated to the founding of Brigate Garibaldi formed in the valley of the village Mrzovici near Pljevlja opened with a ceremony with respect by the Italian president Sandro Pertini.

The town of Žabljak on the Durmitor mountain, the most popular mountain tourism destination in Montenegro
The town of Kolašin, another tourist destination, near the Biogradska Gora national park, the Bjelasica mountain and the ski-resort Bjelasica
Biogradska Gora, with Biogradsko Lake, a national park and untouched virgin forest.

Central region
Although it is the most densely populated area of Montenegro, the central region has fewer tourist attractions. Notable are:

Ostrog monastery, an Orthodox pilgrimage site
Archeological remains of Duklja (Doclea) from Roman times outside Podgorica
Cetinje the old royal capital of Montenegro
Mount Lovćen, the national park and Petar II Petrović-Njegoš's Mausoleum have views of the surrounding area

The Cetinje Monastery located in the old royal capital of Cetinje and the seat of the Metropolitanate of Montenegro
The Morača Canyon
The Morača Monastery overlooking the Morača Canyon
Podgorica the country's capital

Beaches
The length of coastline of Montenegro is 293 km. It has 73 km of beaches, there are over 120 such beaches. There are varying beach styles from sand to pebbles of differing lengths.
Ulcinj
The coast line of Ulcinj is 32 km long. It has more than 10 beaches. Ada Bojana is a river island. It is a triangle shape with sea from one side. The beach is sandy and long. Velika Plaza is the longest beach in Montenegro and is one of the warmest beaches on the Adriatic Sea. It is 12 km long and it is covered with sand. It is very shallow. Small city beach is as same as Velika Plaza but it is not so long. Valdanos is little cove with pebbly beach and flora around it.
Bar
Bar Riviera is 44 km long and has got 9 km of beaches. There are more than 20 beaches but Bar has got 2 beaches on the lakeside. The main beach in Bar is Sutomore beach. It's 1 km long and is covered with sand. Canj beach is 1 km long and is a tourist location. The beach is covered with fine sand but the sea bottom is covered with round rocky pebbles. Queen's beach is very near Canj but it can be only approached from sea. Red beach is specific because it is covered with red round pebbles and the view from it is outstanding. Zukotrlica beach is over 1 km long and it is near the city. It is covered with white pebbles and in the background is a little pine forest. Beach Utjeha is also called "Olive Bay"  because there are hundreds of olives in the background. It is covered with pebbles and is very clear. On the lake there are two beaches: Pjesacac and Murici. They are covered with pebbles.
Budva
Budva Riviera has over 25 beaches and they are favourite destination for tourists in Montenegro. The longest beach is Jaz. It's 2.5 km long and is sandy. Mogren beach has specific small pebbles. It consist two little beaches and they are connected with a tunnel. Slovenska beach is 1.5 km long and is covered with sand. There are lot of hotels, restaurants and parks in the background. The Becici beach is long and sandy. Milocer beach, Queen's beach and Sveti Stefan beach are the most exclusive beaches in Montenegro. Pterovac beach is quiet long and is covered with little red pebbles. Special attraction there are two little isles and little fortress near beach. Buljarica beach is covered with sand and is 2 km long.
Tivat
There are over 15 small beaches in Tivat. Opatovo is a 200 m long pebble beach. Little lighthouse divides beach in two parts. Beach Plavi Horizonti is perhaps the most famous in Tivat. It is 300 m long and covered with small white pebbles. There are two islands near Tivat: The Island of St. Marko and Island of Flowers. They have very nice and attractive beaches.
Kotor
This is the deepest part of Boka Kotorska so there are fewer beaches. There are about 10 small beaches. Morinj beach is a pebbly beach with views of the bay. Risan beach is a quiet, long and rocky beach. Orahovac is the favourite beach in Kotor. It is pebbly with old stone houses in the background. Trsteno is also a pebbly beach. It is 200 m long with clear water and natural background.
Herceg Novi
Herceg Novi Riviera is 25 km long and it has over 20 beaches. Igalo beach is 1.5 km long and sandy. Rose beach is rocky with very nice forest background. Zanjic beach is located in Herceg Novi. It is 300 m long and it is covered with white pebbles.

Statistics by year
National parks
List of national parks of Montenegro

UNESCO World Heritage Sites
The country has two distinct World Heritage Sites and additional two shared with other countries.

See also
Visa policy of Montenegro
Aquarium Boka

External links
 Montenegro travel guide from Wikivoyage
Official Tourism Website of Montenegro


== References ==

## Culture of Montenegro
The culture of Montenegro is as pluralistic and diverse as its history and geographical position would suggest. Montenegro's culture has been influenced by the Serbian Empire, the Byzantine Empire, ancient Greece, ancient Rome, Christianity, the Ottoman Empire, the Republic of Venice, the Habsburg monarchy, and Yugoslavia.

Traditions and customs
The Slava is exclusive custom of the Serbian Orthodox Church believers, each family has one patron saint that they venerate on their feast day. The Serbian Orthodox Church uses the traditional Julian calendar, as per which Christmas Day (December 25) falls currently on January 7 of the Gregorian calendar, thus the Serbs celebrate Christmas on January 7, shared with the Orthodox churches of Jerusalem, Russia, Georgia and the Greek Old Calendarists. An example of a Montenegrin tradition consists of newly-weds planting an olive tree on their wedding day as a symbol of marriage. This tradition was made into law by King Nikola during his reign.

Religion and faith
Montenegrin society is still very conservative. According to the 2011 census, the vast majority of more than 96% of Montenegrin residents declare themselves as members of some religious organization.
While Eastern Orthodox Christianity is the dominant religious denomination in Montenegro, there are also sizable numbers of adherents of both Catholic Christianity and Islam. The dominant Church is the Serbian Orthodox Church although traces of a forming Montenegrin Orthodox Church are present.
The badnjak is a tree branch or young tree brought into the house and placed on the fire on the evening of Christmas Eve, a central tradition in Eastern Orthodox Christmas celebrations in Montenegro. The tree from which the badnjak is cut, preferably a young and straight Austrian oak, is ceremonially felled early on the morning of Christmas Eve. The felling, preparation, bringing in, and laying on the fire, are surrounded by elaborate rituals, with many regional variations.

Tradition
Folk dances
The traditional folk dance is a circle dance called kolo, which is common among Montenegrins, Serbs and Macedonians. It is a collective dance, where a group of people (usually several dozen, at the very least three) hold each other by the hands or around the waist dancing, forming a circle (hence the name), semicircle or spiral. It is called Oro (or the "Eagle dance") in Montenegro. Similar circle dances also exist in other cultures of the region.

Epic songs
Montenegrins' long-standing history of struggle for freedom and independence is invariably linked with strong traditions of oral epic poetry. Traditionally, they are delivered to the audience accompanied by the music produced by a gusle, a one-string instrument played by the storyteller (guslar), who sings or recites the stories of heroes and battles in decasyllabic verse. Historically, these songs have had an immense motivational power over the population. The guslars commanded almost as much respect as the best of warriors, as they were as much the authors, thus history writers, as they were interpreters. Presently, these traditions are somewhat livelier in the northern parts of the country (also shared with people in eastern Herzegovina, western Serbia, and central Dalmatia).

Cuisine
Montenegrin cuisine is a result of Montenegro's geographic position and its long history. The traditional dishes of Montenegro's heartland, and its Adriatic coast have a distinctively Italian flavour which shows in the style of bread and cheese-making and meat curing, as well as the wines and spirits produced and consumed.
The second large influence came from the Levant and Turkey, sarma, musaka, pilav, pita, burek, ćevapi, kebab, and sweets like baklava and tulumba, etc. Hungarian dishes are represented by goulash, satarash, and djuvech.

Architecture
Montenegro has a number of significant cultural and historical sites, including heritage sites from the pre-Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque periods. The Montenegrin coastal region is especially well known for its religious monuments, mostly related to Venetian architecture, including the Cathedral of Saint Tryphon, the basilica of St. Luke (over 800 years), Our Lady of the Rock (Škrpjela), the Savina Monastery, and others. The ancient city of Cattaro (now called Kotor) is listed on the UNESCO World Heritage list, even as a perfect example of the Venetian architecture. The Byzantine influence in architecture, and in religious artwork is especially apparent in the country's interior.

Literature
Montenegrin literature refers to the entire (historical and modern) corpus of literature created in Montenegro, written mainly in Montenegrin, Serbian and other related languages spoken in the country.

Characteristics
Although there are works written at least 800 years ago (like the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja), the most important representatives are writers who lived in 19th and 20th century and wrote mainly in Serbian. The first literary works written in the region are ten centuries old, and the first Montenegrin book was printed five hundreds years ago.
In Venetian Cattaro (actual Kotor) there were a group of writers and poets that introduced Renaissance culture in coastal Montenegro, writing in Latin and Italian: Ludovico Pasquali, Giovanni Bona de Boliris, Giovanni Polizza, Giorgio Bisanti, Girolamo Pima, Timoteo Cisilla, Giovanni Crussala, Giuseppe Bronza and Girolamo Panizzola.
The first state-owned printing press (Printing House of Crnojevići) was located in Cetinje in 1494, where the first South Slavic book was printed the same year (Oktoih). A number of medieval manuscripts, dating from the 13th century, are kept in the Montenegrin monasteries. On the substratum of traditional oral folk epic poetry, authors like Petar II Petrović Njegoš have created their own expression. His epic Gorski Vijenac (The Mountain Wreath), written in the Montenegrin vernacular, presents the central point of Montenegrin culture at the time.

Notable authors
In 18th and 19th centuries: Petar II Petrović-Njegoš, Andrija Zmajević, Vasilije Petrović-Njegoš, Petar I Petrović-Njegoš, Vuk Vrčević, Stefan Mitrov Ljubiša and Marko Miljanov.
In 20th century: Mihailo Lalić, Milovan Đilas, Radovan Zogović, Ćamil Sijarić, Čedo Vuković, Mirko Kovač, Dragan Radulović and Vito Nikolić.
Contemporary authors include: Balša Brković, Borislav Jovanović, Jevrem Brković, Andrej Nikolaidis, Tanja Bakić, Bosiljka Pušić and Dragana Kršenković Brković.

Painting and sculpture
The Faculty of the Fine Arts in Cetinje has helped usher in new talent. Some of the most prominent painters from Montenegro include Milo Milunović, Petar Lubarda, Dado Đurić, Uroš Tošković, Vojo Stanić, Dimitrije Popović, Boris Dragojević and sculptor Risto Stijović.

Music
The music of Montenegro represents a mix of the country's unique musical tradition and Western musical influences. The music of Montenegro has been relatively overlooked, especially in comparison with its literature and visual arts. Nevertheless, the 20th century produced several outstanding composers and interpreters.

Historical overview
In the 10th and 11th centuries a composer of religious chants (Jovan of Duklja) was the oldest composer known from the Adriatic coast. At the end of the 12th century a script was made, now called Ljetopis Popa Dukljanina, which described the secular use of musical instruments. Seven liturgies from the 15th century, written by a Venetian publisher L.A. Giunta, have been saved at St Clare's church in Kotor. In those centuries the typical music "venetian style" was introduced to coastal Montenegro (then called Albania Veneta).

Religious music development was sparked in the 19th century, when a Catholic singing academy was opened in Kotor. Also, until the musical renaissance of the 20th century, Montenegrin music was mainly based on the simple traditional instrument, the gusle. The oldest singing society, named "Jedinstvo" was formed in Kotor in 1839. The first music school in Montenegro was founded in 1934 in Cetinje.

Traditional music
Traditional music heritage is somewhat different in different parts of Montenegro. In traditional music, different styles can be noticed in the Gulf of Kotor area, Old Montenegro and Sanjak regions. Old Montenegro traditional music is based around the traditional instrument, the gusle. The music is mainly vocal, or instrumental-vocal. Many songs are adapted from the epics, and are based on the events and tales from Montenegrin tradition.

Classical music
Due to the country's turbulent history, filled with defensive wars and constant fighting for freedom, the development of culture, especially music, was a secondary interest for Montenegrins. The first notable Montenegrin composer was Jovan Ivanišević (1860–1889). He composed piano miniatures, orchestra, solo and chorus songs that were performed even in Prague. He died when he was only 29 years old. In the 19th century, there were also many operas with librettos inspired by Montenegro and its culture, like the famous "Balkan Empress". Other prominent 19th-century composers include Aleksa Ivanović and Dragan Milošević, who graduated from Prague music schools.
In the beginning of the 20th century, when music schools were first introduced, and culture started developing faster, Montenegrin music started flourishing. There have been a number of notable classical music composers from Montenegro, especially during the 20th century. In the first half of the century, two musical schools developed: one based in Cetinje, and the other one in Podgorica. An important role in the music development of that time was played by Radio Titograd, which broadcast various music programmes daily, and helped popularise the music. At that time, composers started returning to the roots, introducing many traditional elements in modern compositions. Also, during the 1940s and 1950s, musical schools were opened in Kotor, Podgorica, Cetinje, Tivat, Herceg Novi, Nikšić, Bar, Ulcinj and Berane.
The Argentine composer Mauricio Annunziata, taking possession of the Montenegrin culture, religion and music, produced the cantata Akatist Op. 108, Hymns of Praise to Saint Basil of Ostrog at the Basilica Santa Maria del Popolo in Rome in May 2008, for solo voices, chorus and orchestra, also in version for organ. This concert marked the second anniversary of the Independence of Montenegro and it was held before the entire diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See and the highest authorities of the Vatican City. The work was hugely successful in the Italian version of the text produced by Dragana Polovič.
Today, Montenegro is known for several award-winning classical guitarists, among them Montenegrin Guitar Duo (Goran Krivokapić and Danijel Cerović) and Miloš Karadaglić.

Popular music in Montenegro
Probably the best known rock band from Montenegro is Perper from Cetinje. Other notable rock bands include DST (from Nikšić) and Highway, Autogeni Trening, Gospoda Glembajevi and Mikrokozma (from the capital, Podgorica). Rock musicians from Montenegro who were popular throughout the former Yugoslavia include Marinko Pavićević, Miladin Šobić and Rambo Amadeus. While the notable pop singers from Montenegro are Sergej Ćetković, Vanja Radovanović, Slavko Kalezić, Bojan Marović, Knez, Vlado Georgiev, Nina Petković, Andrea Demirović, Stefan Filipović, Nina Žižić, also pop music groups No Name and D mol. There are currently several active rock and pop Festivals in Montenegro, the most notables are Sea Dance Festival, Cetinje Beer Fest, "City Groove" in Podgorica, "Lake" and "Bedem" Fests in Nikšić, and many other summer music festivals. Montenegro also hosts a national music award, the Montefon Awards, organized by the Association of Variety Artists and Performers of Montenegro, which were originally awarded from 2001 to 2007 and revived in 2024. Since 2007, Montenegro has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest as an independent state.

Performing arts
Film
Considering its population of about 600,000 people, Montenegro has produced a number of outstanding film directors and actors including Dušan Vukotić, the first Yugoslav Oscar winner (for the short animated film category in 1961), Veljko Bulajić, and Živko Nikolić.
Other notable Montenegrin directors and filmmakers include: Krsto Papić, Branko Baletić, Velimir Stojanović, Zdravko Velimirović, Bane Bastać, Predrag Golubović, Krsto Škanata, Milo Đukanović, and perspective filmmakers of new generation Ivan Salatić,
Gojko Berkuljan, Marija Perović, Nikola Vukčević, Željko Sošić and Ivona Juka.
In 2013, the Montenegrin film Bad Destiny became the first film from the country to be submitted for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

Theatre
Notable theatres include the Montenegrin National Theatre in Podgorica, the Theatre of Nikšić in Nikšić, and the City Theatre in Podgorica. Montenegrin National Theatre is the only professional theatre and along with the Faculty of Drama, located in Cetinje is responsible for the lion's share of theatre production in the country. During the summer months, the City Theatre in Budva takes precedence as a stage for performers coming from all corners of the former Yugoslavia and the world.
Many scholars believe that the biggest contribution to Montenegrin music in theater was by Dionisio de Sarno San Giorgio, the Italian composer who spent most of his life in the country. His "Balkan Empress" – inspired by the work of King Nikola – received high praise from Italian critics during the second half of the 19th century.

Montenegro as a theme in foreign works
Croatian poet Ivan Mažuranić wrote a Montenegrin-themed epic poem, The Death of Smail-aga Čengić.
The 2006 James Bond film Casino Royale is partially set in Montenegro.
The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald, refers to a decoration which Jay Gatsby received for his war efforts.
Nero Wolfe, Rex Stout's fictional character, is born in Montenegro.

Institutions
Montenegrin Academy of Sciences and Arts
Matica Crnogorska
University of Montenegro
Montenegrin PEN Center
Podgorica Book Fair
Ministry of Culture of Montenegro

References
Further reading
Немировский, Евгений Львович [in Russian] (1993). Издања Божидара и Вићенца Вуковића, Стефана Мариновића, Јакова од Камене реке, Јеролима Загуровића, Јакова Крајкова, Ђованиа Антониа Рампацета, Марка и Бартоломеа Ђинамиа: 1519–1638 [Editions Božidar and Vićenco Vuković, Stefan Marinović, Jakov of Kamena Reka, Jerolim Zagurović, Jakov Krajkov, Giovanni Antonio Rampazzetto, Marko and Bartolomeo Ginami: 1519–1638]. Црногорска библиографија: 1494–1994 (in Serbo-Croatian). Vol. 1, 2. Cetinje: Централна народна библиотека Црне Горе 'Ђурђе Црнојевић'. ISBN 86-7079-033-5. ISSN 1800-7082.

## Cuisine of Montenegro
Montenegrin cuisine is a result of Montenegro's geographic position and its long history and tradition.

Review
The first major influences to Montenegrin cuisine came from the Levant and Turkey, largely via Serbia: sarma, musaka, pilav, pita, gibanica, burek, ćevapi, kebab, đuveč, and Turkish sweets such as baklava and tulumba.
Hungarian cuisine influences stews and sataraš. Central European cuisine is evident in the prevalence of crêpes, doughnuts, jams, many types of biscuits and cakes, and various kinds of breads.
Montenegrin cuisine also varies geographically; the cuisine in the coastal area differs from that of the northern highland region. The coastal area is traditionally a representative of Mediterranean cuisine, with seafood being a common dish. The traditional dishes of Montenegro's Adriatic coast, unlike its heartland, have a distinctively Italian influence as well.

Common dishes
Bread
Homemade-style bread prepared in Montenegro is closest to what is known in Italy as pane casareccio. It is served with every meal. Types include ječmeni (barley bread), ražani (rye bread), pšenični (wheat bread), and rumetinov (corn bread).

Breakfast
Cicvara - stewed cornmeal with kaymak (salted and then compressed fresh cream).
Gibanica with yoghurt or kisjelo mlijeko (buttermilk).
Popara and bread with kajmak
Pršut (most notable is njeguški pršut)

Soups
Montenegrin language distinguishes between a clear soup (supa, pronounced [ˈsupə]), a thick soup or stew (čorba, pronounced [ˈtʃɔrbə]), and a porridge-style dish (kaša, pronounced [ˈkəʃə]). Soups are usually served as the first course of lunch at midday:

Kokošija supa (chicken broth)
Goveđa/juneća/teleća supa (beef/calf broth)
Jagnjeća supa (lamb broth)
Traditionally, after the broth is made, a handful of rice is added to the pot to make the soup more substantial. Nowadays, pasta has taken over as the preferred addition.

Čorba od koprive (nettle chowder)
Čorba od koprive sa sirom (nettle chowder with cheese)
Čobanska krem supa od vrganja (shepherd cream soup with mushrooms (boletus))
Otkos čorba (cut hay chowder)
Čorba od crnjaka (black onion chowder)
Ječmena kaša sa pečurkama (barley porridge with mushrooms)
Kaša sa pečurkama (mushroom porridge)
Kaša od rezanaca (noodle porridge)

Main course
Kuvani brav (boiled lamb)
Brav u mlijeku (lamb cooked in milk, a national dish of Albanians from Montenegro)
Kačamak (polenta with buttered potato and kaymak, served with cold milk, buttermilk or yoghurt)
Kuvana krtola (boiled potato halves, served with cold yoghurt, cheese or fresh cream)
Ukljeva (smoked and dried bleak)
Krap (smoked and fresh carp, from Lake Skadar)
Pastrmka or pastrva (freshwater trout)
Raštan (a slightly bitter, sturdy dark-green vegetable from the cabbage family, similar to Italian cavolo nero. It is cooked into a stew with smoked pork ribs or ham hocks)
Zelje u kokote na kastradinu (cooked headed cabbage with smoked and dried mutton)
Punjene paprike (dolma made with bell peppers)
Čorbast pasulj (bean stew with smoked ribs and various types of salami and sausages. The style is similar to French cassoulet, fabada, and feijoada)
Maune (green bean stew)
Grašak (peas and beef stew)
Balšića tava (fried veal with an assortment of vegetables and dairy products)
Paštrovski makaruli (a type of homemade macaroni with olive oil and cheese from brine)
Seafood dishes include grilled or fried squid, octopus salad, black risotto (with cuttlefish), tuna, prawns, and mussels.

Salads
The most common salads served in Montenegrin homes:

Pamidora salata (tomato salad) - similar to bruschetta toppings: tomato, onion, olive oil, and rock sea salt.
Zelena salata (green salad) - spring lettuce and spring onion combination, with olive oil, salt, and vinegar dressing.
Ajvar (fried or roasted capsicum relish)
Kisjelo zelje (sauerkraut)

Dessert
A piece of seasonal fruit is the most common way to end the meal. The proper sweets are usually served on their own, around tea time or at any time coffee is served.

Priganice (fritters or flat doughnuts) served with honey, cheese, or jam.
Sundried figs with walnuts and honey.
Sutlijaš (rice pudding)
Slatko od dunja (quince relish)
Džem od šljiva (plum jam)
Sok od šipka (pomegranate syrup): homemade syrup made from wild pomegranates, that grow just about everywhere in the southern half of Montenegro, can be found in almost every home.
Jello - typically white and sticky in its consistency

Dairy products
Kisjelo mlijeko - buttermilk
Jogurt - yoghurt
Pavlaka - homemade sour cream
Maslac - butter

Cheese
Njeguški sir - special cheese, kept in oil.
Pljevaljski sir - salted aged cheese made of cow's milk.
Skorup - salted cottage cream
Cijeli sir - whole cheese, made from unboiled milk.
Prljo - cheese made from skimmed milk.
Žetica - cheese made from unboiled milk.
Buča - another kind of cheese made from unboiled milk.

Pita
Sukača (gužvara) - a pastry or pie made through the process of "crowding".
Koturača (wheel-like) (exclusively made from domestic wheat)
Pita izljevuša (brkanica) - a pastry made by the process of "casting".
Zeljanica (a pastry made with green herbs)
Heljdija

Other dishes
Breakfast
Burek - the most popular fast food in the country.

Main course
Dessert
Grill-based dishes (roštilj)
Affordable fast food includes ćevapi, pljeskavica (served in a local form of hamburger), and ražnjići.

Beverages
Non-alcoholic
The most common non-alcoholic drink in Montenegrin homes is pomegranate syrup. Turkish coffee is also almost unavoidable in any but the briefest meeting or visit.

Kisjela voda (mineral water)
Sok od drenjina i drenjinava voda (homemade cornelian cherry juice and syrup)
Turkish coffee
Espresso
Sok od šipka (pomegranate syrup)
Sok od grožđa (grape syrup)
Boza
Mezgra (beech cream)

Alcoholic
Beer is brewed in the Trebjesa brewery. Wine is also made in the country, such as Vranac. Rakia and pelinkovac are traditional distilled drinks from the Balkans.


== References ==

## List of museums in Montenegro
This is a list of museums in Montenegro.

List
Cetinje Royal Palace
Church-Mosque of Ulcinj
Heritage Museum Pljevlja
"Josip Broz Tito" Art Gallery of the Nonaligned Countries
King Nikola's Palace
Museum of Local History in Ulcinj
National Museum of Montenegro
Our Lady of the Rocks

See also
Culture of Montenegro
List of Yugoslav World War II monuments and memorials in Montenegro
Tourism in Montenegro

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- Kotor
- Budva
- Bar
- Herceg Novi
- Tivat

## Famous Museums
- National Museum of Montenegro, Podgorica
- Cetinje Cathedral Museum, Cetinje
- Old Town Museum, Budva
- Natural History Museum, Podgorica
- Art Museum, Kotor

## Local Desserts
- Burek
- Kiselica
- Palačinke
- Keks
- Strukli


==================================================
## 📖 Wikipedia Information — Karadağ
SOURCE_URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karadağ
==================================================

## Summary
Kara Dag or Qara Dag (Dag/Dağ/Dagh, occasionally Daq or Tagh) is Oghuz Turkic for "Black Mountain". It may be written as one word (Karadag), a hyphenated word (Kara-dag), or as two words (Kara Dag).  Any of these spellings may refer to:

## People
Fikri Karadağ (born 1953), Turkish army colonel indicted for treason

## Azerbaijan
Qaradağlı, Ağdam or Qaradağ, Azerbaijan
Qaradağ, Agsu, a village and municipality in the Agsu District, Azerbaijan
Qaradağ raion, a village and district near Baku, Azerbaijan
Qaradağ, Gadabay, a village and municipality in the Gadabay District, Azerbaijan
Qaradaş or Qaradağ, a village and municipality in the Tovuz District, Azerbaijan

## Iran
Qara Daq, East Azarbaijan or Arasbaran, a mountain range in Iran
Qarrah Dagh, Zanjan, a village in Golabar, Ijrud County, Iran

## Turkey
Mount Karadağ, an extinct volcano in Turkey
Karadağ, Kaş, a village in Antalya Province, Turkey
Karadağ, Çan
Karadağ, Ezine
Karadağ, Kemah
Karadağ, Narman

## Ukraine
Karadag Mountain, also known as Qaradağ or Kara-Dag, an extinct volcano in Crimea

## Elsewhere
Montenegro, the state or province, known as Karadağ under the Ottoman Empire and in Turkish language as the country name
Skopska Crna Gora, formerly known as Kara-dagh or Karadag, a mountain range north of Skopje, Macedonia, Kosovo and Serbia
Karadaglije, a village in northern Bosnia and Herzegovina
Karadagh a village from Kurdistan iraq near As Sulaymaniah

## Other uses
Karadag Khanate (1747–1808), a khanate around Ahar, Iran
Karadagh rug, a style of carpet from the Karadagh area of Iran
