--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Qatar
FILE_NAME: country_qatar.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:50:00
----------------

# Qatar

## General Overview
Qatar, officially the State of Qatar, is a country in West Asia. It occupies the Qatar Peninsula on the northeastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula in the Middle East; it shares its sole land border with Saudi Arabia to the south, with the rest of its territory surrounded by the Persian Gulf. The Gulf of Bahrain, an inlet of the Persian Gulf, separates Qatar from nearby Bahrain. The capital is Doha, home to over 80% of the country's inhabitants. Most of the land area is made up of flat, low-lying desert.
Qatar has been ruled as a hereditary monarchy by the House of Thani since Mohammed bin Thani signed an agreement with Britain in 1868, that officially recognised its separate status. Following Ottoman rule, Qatar became a British protectorate in 1916 and gained independence in 1971. The current emir is Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, who, like previous emirs, holds nearly all executive, legislative, and judicial authority in an autocratic manner under the Constitution of Qatar. He appoints the prime minister and cabinet. The Shura Council (also known as the "Consultative Assembly") has a limited ability to block legislation and dismiss ministers, but is fully appointed by the emir, who also has the last say on these decisions. While Qatar held a partial Shura Council election in 2021, with two thirds of seats elected, in 2024 it moved to abolish those elections altogether, and reverted to a fully appointed Council.
On June 21, 2026, the population of Qatar was 3,180,059, although 3.02 million are foreign expatriates and migrant workers. Its official religion is Islam. The country has the fourth-highest GDP (PPP) per capita in the world and the eleventh-highest GNI per capita (Atlas method). It ranks 42nd in the Human Development Index, the third-highest HDI in the Arab world. It is a high-income economy, backed by the world's third-largest natural gas reserves and oil reserves. Qatar is one of the world's largest exporters of liquefied natural gas and the world's largest emitter of carbon dioxide per capita.
In the 21st century, Qatar emerged as both a non-NATO ally of the United States and a middle power in the Arab world. Its economy has grown rapidly due to its resource-wealth, and its geopolitical power has risen through its media group, Al Jazeera Media Network, and reported financial support for rebel groups during the Arab Spring. Qatar also forms part of the Gulf Cooperation Council.

Name
Pliny the Elder, a Roman writer, documented the earliest account pertaining to the inhabitants of the peninsula around the mid-first century AD; he referred to them as the Catharrei, a designation that may have derived from the name of a prominent local settlement. A century later, Ptolemy produced the first known map to depict the peninsula, referring to it as Catara. The map also referenced a town named "Cadara" to the east of the peninsula. The term "Catara" (inhabitants, Cataraei) was exclusively used until the 18th century, after which "Katara" emerged as the most commonly recognised spelling. Eventually, after several variations—"Katr", "Kattar" and "Guttur"—the modern derivative Qatar was adopted as the country's name.
According to classical linguistic accounts, the term "Qatar" may derive from a type of informal transaction known as muqāṭarah, in which goods were purchased in sealed containers without measuring or weighing the contents, for a fixed price. This practice, also called jazāf, was reportedly widespread in Qatar's markets. Another explanation connects the name to the word qiṭār, meaning camel train, possibly alluding to Qatar's role in historical trade routes.
In Standard Arabic, the name is pronounced [ˈqɑtˤɑr], while in the local dialect, Qatari Arabic, it is [ˈɡɪtˤɑr]. English speakers use different approximate pronunciations as the Arabic pronunciations use sounds not present in English.

History
Prehistory
Human habitation in Qatar dates back to 50,000 years ago. Settlements and tools dating back to the Stone Age have been unearthed in the peninsula. Mesopotamian artefacts originating from the Ubaid period (c. 6500–3800 BC) have been discovered in abandoned coastal settlements. Al Da'asa, a settlement located on the western coast of Qatar, is the most important Ubaid site in the country and is believed to have accommodated a small seasonal encampment.  Some historians have theorised that the Sumerians may have originated from this region.

Antiquity
Kassite Babylonian material dating back to the second millennium BC found on the Al Khor Islands attests to trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassites in modern-day Bahrain. Among the findings were crushed snail shells and Kassite potsherds. It has been suggested that Qatar is the earliest known site of shellfish dye production, owing to a Kassite purple dye industry which existed on the coast.
In AD 224, the Sasanian Empire gained control over the territories surrounding the Persian Gulf. Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye. Under the Sasanid reign, many of the inhabitants in eastern Arabia were introduced to Christianity following the eastward dispersal of the religion by Mesopotamian Christians (see also Christianity in pre-Islamic Arabia). Monasteries were constructed and further settlements were founded during this era. During the latter part of the Christian era, Qatar comprised a region known as 'Beth Qatraye' (Syriac for "house of the Qataris"). The region was not limited to Qatar; it also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa.
In 628, the Islamic prophet Muhammad sent a Muslim envoy to a ruler in eastern Arabia named Munzir ibn Sawa Al-Tamimi and requested that he and his subjects accept Islam. Munzir obliged his request, and accordingly most of the Arab tribes in the region converted to Islam. In the middle of the century, the Muslim conquest of Persia resulted in the fall of the Sasanian Empire.

Early and late Islamic period (661–1783)
Qatar was described as a famous horse and camel breeding centre during the Umayyad period. In the 8th century, it started benefiting from its commercially strategic position in the Persian Gulf and went on to become a centre of pearl trading.
Substantial development in the pearling industry around the Qatari Peninsula occurred during the Abbasid period. Ships voyaging from Basra to India and China would make stops in Qatar's ports during this period. Chinese porcelain, West African coins, and artefacts from Thailand have been discovered in Qatar. Archaeological remains from the 9th century suggest that Qatar's inhabitants used greater wealth to construct higher quality homes and public buildings. Over 100 stone-built houses, two mosques, and an Abbasid fort were constructed in Murwab during this period. As the caliphate's prosperity waned in Iraq, Qatar experienced a corresponding decline.
Qatar is mentioned in 13th-century Muslim scholar Yaqut al-Hamawi's book, Mu'jam Al-Buldan, which alludes to the Qataris' fine striped woven cloaks and their skills in improvement and finishing of spears.
Much of eastern Arabia was controlled by the Usfurids in 1253, but control of the region was seised by the prince of Ormus in 1320. Qatar's pearls provided the kingdom with one of its main sources of income.

Portuguese era (1507–1650)
In 1515, Manuel I of Portugal vassalised the Kingdom of Ormus. Portugal went on to seize a significant portion of eastern Arabia in 1521.
After the fall of the Jabrid Dynasty with the conquest of Bahrain by the Portuguese, the Arabian coast up to Al Hassa came under the rule and influence of the Portuguese empire. Attempts by the Ottomans to dominate the region were eliminated with the Portuguese reconquest of the castle of Tarout or Al Qatif in 1551. In 1550, the inhabitants of Al-Hasa had voluntarily submitted to the rule of the Ottomans, preferring them to the Portuguese.
Archaeological finds are still being excavated from one of the Portuguese fortresses that served as a base to dominate the region as Ruwayda. The first representation of Qatar appears on the Portuguese map by Luis Lázaro in 1563, showing the "city of Qatar" as a fortress, possibly referring to the fort of Ruwayda.
Having retained a negligible military presence in the area, the Ottomans were expelled by the Bani Khalid tribe and their emirate in 1670.

Bahraini and Saudi rule (1783–1868)
In 1766, members of the Al Khalifa family of the Utub tribal confederation migrated from Kuwait to Zubarah in Qatar. By the time of their arrival, the Bani Khalid exercised weak authority over the peninsula, notwithstanding the fact that the largest village was ruled by their distant kin. In 1783, Qatar-based Bani Utbah clans and allied Arab tribes invaded and annexed Bahrain from the Persians. The Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and retained their jurisdiction over Zubarah.
Following his swearing-in as crown prince of the Emirate of Diriyah in 1788, Saud ibn Abd al-Aziz moved to expand Wahhabi territory eastward towards the Persian Gulf and Qatar. After defeating the Bani Khalid in 1795, the Wahhabi were attacked on two fronts. The Ottomans and Egyptians assaulted the western front, while the Al Khalifa in Bahrain and the Omanis launched an attack against the eastern front. Upon being made aware of the Egyptian advance on the western frontier in 1811, the Wahhabi amir reduced his garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah in order to redeploy his troops. Said bin Sultan, Sultan of Muscat and Oman, capitalised on this opportunity and raided the Wahhabi garrisons on the eastern coast, setting fire to the fort in Zubarah. The Al Khalifa was effectively returned to power thereafter.

As punishment for piracy, an East India Company vessel bombarded Doha in 1821, destroying the town and forcing hundreds of residents to flee. In 1825, the House of Thani was established with Sheikh Mohammed bin Thani as the first leader.
Although Qatar was considered a dependency of Bahrain, the Al Khalifa faced opposition from the local tribes. In 1867, the Al Khalifa, along with the ruler of Abu Dhabi, sent a massive naval force to Al Wakrah in an effort to crush the Qatari rebels. This resulted in the maritime Qatari–Bahraini War of 1867–68, in which Bahraini and Abu Dhabi forces sacked and looted Doha and Al Wakrah. The Bahraini hostilities were in violation of the Perpetual Truce of Peace and Friendship of 1861. The joint incursion, in addition to the Qatari counter-attack, prompted British Political Resident, Colonel Lewis Pelly to impose a settlement in 1868. His mission to Bahrain and Qatar and the resulting peace treaty were milestones because they implicitly recognised the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani. In addition to censuring Bahrain for its breach of agreement, Pelly negotiated with Qatari sheikhs who were represented by Mohammed bin Thani. The negotiations were the first stage in the development of Qatar as a sheikhdom.

Ottoman period (1871–1915)
Under military and political pressure from the governor of the Ottoman Vilayet of Baghdad, Midhat Pasha, the ruling Al Thani tribe submitted to Ottoman rule in 1871. The Ottoman government imposed reformist (Tanzimat) measures concerning taxation and land registration to fully integrate these areas into the empire. Despite the disapproval of local tribes, Al Thani continued supporting the Ottoman rule. Qatari-Ottoman relations stagnated, and in 1882 they suffered further setbacks when the Ottomans refused to aid Al Thani in his expedition of Abu Dhabi-occupied Khor Al Adaid and offered only limited support in the Qatari–Abu Dhabi War, mainly due to fear of British intervention on Abu Dhabi's side. In addition, the Ottomans supported the Ottoman subject Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab who attempted to supplant Al Thani as kaymakam of Qatar in 1888. This eventually led Al Thani to rebel against the Ottomans, whom he believed were seeking to usurp control of the peninsula. He resigned as kaymakam and stopped paying taxes in August 1892.
In February 1893, Mehmed Hafiz Pasha arrived in Qatar in the interests of seeking unpaid taxes and accosting Jassim bin Mohammed's opposition to proposed Ottoman administrative reforms. Fearing that he would face death or imprisonment, Jassim retreated to Al Wajbah (16 km or 10 mi west of Doha), accompanied by several tribe members. Mehmed's demand that Jassim disband his troops and pledge his loyalty to the Ottomans was met with refusal. In March, Mehmed imprisoned Jassim's brother and 13 prominent Qatari tribal leaders on the Ottoman corvette Merrikh as punishment for his insubordination. After Mehmed declined an offer to release the captives for a fee of 10,000 liras, he ordered a column of approximately 200 troops to advance towards Jassim's Al Wajbah Fort under the command of Yusuf Effendi, thus signalling the start of the Battle of Al Wajbah.
Effendi's troops came under heavy gunfire by a sizable troop of Qatari infantry and cavalry shortly after arriving at Al Wajbah. They retreated to Shebaka fortress where they were again forced to draw back from a Qatari incursion. After retreating from Shebaka to Al Bidda, the Ottomans were besieged by Jassim's forces, forcing them to surrender, release captives, and secure safe passage for Mehmed Pasha's cavalry to Hofuf. Although Qatar did not gain full independence from the Ottoman Empire, the result of the battle forced a treaty that would later form the basis of Qatar's emerging as an autonomous country within the empire.

British period (1916–1971)
By the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1913, the Ottomans agreed to renounce their claim to Qatar and withdraw their garrison from Doha. With the outbreak of World War I however, nothing was done to carry this out, and the garrison remained in the fort at Doha, although its numbers dwindled as men deserted. In 1915, with the presence of British gunboats in the harbour, Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani (who was pro-British) persuaded the remainder to abandon the fort, and when British troops approached the following morning, they found it deserted.
Qatar became a British protectorate on 3 November 1916 when the United Kingdom signed a treaty with Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani to bring Qatar under its Trucial System of Administration. The treaty reserved foreign affairs and defence to the United Kingdom but allowed internal autonomy. While Abdullah agreed not to enter into any relations with any other power without the prior consent of the British government, the latter guaranteed the protection of Qatar from aggression by sea and provide its 'good offices' in the event of an attack by land. This latter undertaking was left deliberately vague.
On 5 May 1935, while agreeing an oil concession with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, Abdullah signed another treaty with the British government which granted Qatar protection against internal and external threats. Oil reserves were first discovered in 1939. Exploitation and development were, however, delayed by World War II.

The focus of British interests in Qatar changed after the Second World War with the independence of India, the creation of Pakistan in 1947, and the development of oil in Qatar. In 1949, the appointment of the first British political officer in Doha, John Wilton, signified a strengthening of Anglo-Qatari relations. Oil exports began in 1949, and oil revenues became the country's main source of revenue; the pearl trade had gone into decline. These revenues were used to fund the expansion and modernisation of Qatar's infrastructure.
When Britain officially announced in 1968 that it would withdraw from the Persian Gulf in three years' time, Qatar joined talks with Bahrain and seven other Trucial States to create the Federation of Arab Emirates. Regional disputes, however, persuaded Qatar and Bahrain to withdraw from the talks and become independent states separate from the Trucial States, which went on to become the United Arab Emirates. The emir, Ahmad bin Ali, promulgated a provisional constitution in April 1970 that declared Qatar an independent, Arab, and Islamic state with sharia as its basic law. Khalifa bin Hamad was named prime minister in May 1970.

Independence and later (1971–2000)
Under an agreement with the United Kingdom, on 3 September 1971, the "special treaty arrangements" that were "inconsistent with full international responsibility as a sovereign and independent state" were terminated. Ahmad bin Ali  made the announcement of Qatar's independence from his villa in Switzerland. He was deposed on 22 February 1972 by Khalifa bin Hamad, with the tacit support of Britain, Saudi Arabia, and the House of Al Thani.
In 1991, Qatar played a significant role in the Gulf War, particularly during the Battle of Khafji in which Qatari tanks rolled through the streets of the town and provided fire support for the Saudi Arabian National Guard units that were engaging Iraqi Army troops. Qatar allowed coalition troops from Canada to use the country as an airbase to launch aircraft on combat air patrol duty and also permitted air forces from the United States and France to operate in its territories. By the mid-1990s Khalifa bin Hamad was still emir, but day-to-day rule was gradually taken over by his son Hamad bin Khalifa.
In 1995, Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani seized control of the country from his father Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, with the support of the armed forces and cabinet, as well as neighbouring states and France. Under Emir Hamad, Qatar experienced a moderate degree of liberalisation, including the launch of the Al Jazeera television station in 1996, the endorsement of women's suffrage or right to vote in municipal elections in 1999, participation of women in society in 2003, drafting its first written constitution in 2005 and inauguration of a Roman Catholic church in 2008. Mehran Kamrava of Georgetown University in Qatar has suggested that Qatar's highly publicized campaign of political liberalisation was meant to help stabilize the regime under Hamad, especially through support from the West, and that once sufficient stabilization was achieved, the guise of domestic liberalisation was largely dropped. Although the Ministry of Information was abolished in 1998, with the press occasionally allowed to criticize the economy or the status of foreign workers, journalists continue to face a "draconian system of censorship". An unsuccessful counter-coup was staged in 1996.

21st century
Qatar's economy and status as a regional power rapidly grew in the 2000s. According to the UN, the nation's economic growth, measured by GDP, was the fastest in the world during this decade. The basis of this growth lay in the exploitation of natural gas in the North Field during the 1990s. At the same time, the population tripled between 2001 and 2011, mostly from an influx of foreigners.
In 2003, Qatar served as the United States Central Command headquarters and one of the main launching sites of the invasion of Iraq to topple the government of Saddam Hussein. Shortly before the invasion, Qatari government offered sanctuary to Saddam. In March 2005, a suicide bombing killed a British teacher at the Doha Players Theatre, shocking the country, which had not previously experienced acts of terrorism. The bombing was carried out by Omar Ahmed Abdullah Ali, an Egyptian resident in Qatar who had suspected ties to Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
The increased influence of Qatar and its role during the Arab Spring, especially during the 2011 uprisings in Bahrain against King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, worsened longstanding tensions with Saudi Arabia, the neighbouring United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain. In 2011, Qatar joined NATO operations in Libya and reportedly armed Libyan opposition groups against Muammar Gaddafi. It was also a major funder of weapons for rebel groups in the Syrian civil war against Bashar al-Assad. Qatar participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh.
In June 2017, Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Bahrain, Egypt and Yemen broke diplomatic ties with Qatar, accusing Qatar of supporting terrorism. The crisis escalated a dispute over Qatar's support of the Muslim Brotherhood, which is considered a terrorist organisation by some Arab nations, as well as over its ties with Iran. Qatar was expelled from the anti-Houthi coalition. The crisis lead to a strengthening of Qatar's relationship with Iran, which provided significant material and political support, rather than its weakening. The diplomatic crisis ended in January 2021 with the signing of the al-Ula declaration. Qatar did not fulfil any of the original 13 demands, with analysts saying that the Gulf states agreed instead to a vague "joint security declaration".
On 2 December 2010, Qatar won the right to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup from 21 November to 18 December 2022, making it the first Arab and Muslim-majority country to do so, and the third Asian country to host it following the 2002 FIFA World Cup in Japan and South Korea.. The awarding increased further investment and developments within the nation during the 2010s. In June 2013, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani became the emir of Qatar after his father handed over power. Sheikh Tamim has prioritised improving the domestic welfare of citizens, which includes establishing advanced healthcare and education systems, and expanding the country's infrastructure in preparation for the hosting of the 2022 World Cup.

Geography
The Qatari peninsula protrudes 160 kilometres (100 mi) into the Persian Gulf, north of Saudi Arabia. It lies between latitudes 24° and 27° N, and longitudes 50° and 52° E. Most of the country consists of a low, barren plain, covered with sand. To the southeast lies the Khor al Adaid ("Inland Sea"), an area of rolling sand dunes surrounding an inlet of the Persian Gulf.
The highest point is Qurayn Abu al Bawl at 103 metres (338 ft) in the Jebel Dukhan to the west, a range of low limestone outcroppings running north–south from Zekreet through Umm Bab to the southern border. The Jebel Dukhan area also contains Qatar's main onshore oil deposits, while the natural gas fields lie offshore, to the northwest of the peninsula.
Qatar's geography is defined by its flat, dry desert scenery and sunshine all year. The winters are mild, with average temperatures of 18.5 °C (65.3 °F) in January, and the summers are very hot, with temperatures often reaching 40 °C (104 °F). The country only gets 70 millimetres (2.8 in) of rain a year on average, and most of that falls between October and March. These weather conditions make it possible to enjoy outdoor sports and travel for most of the year.

Biodiversity
Qatar became part of the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity in 1996. It subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan in 2005. A total of 142 fungal species have been recorded from Qatar. A book recently produced by the Ministry of Environment documents the lizards known or believed to occur in Qatar, based on surveys conducted by an international team of scientists and other collaborators.
Like other members of the UNFCCC, Qatar is supposed to publish details of its greenhouse gas emissions two years after they occur – however as of 2024 the latest official details are for 2007 emissions. According to the Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research, carbon dioxide emissions per person average over 30 tonnes, one of the highest in the world.

Climate
Politics
Qatar is officially a constitutional monarchy, but the wide powers retained by the monarchy have it bordering an absolute monarchy with autocratic  rule by the Al Thani family. The Al Thani dynasty has been ruling Qatar since the family house was established in 1825.
The eighth emir of Qatar is Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani. The emir has the exclusive power to appoint the prime minister and cabinet ministers who, together, constitute the Council of Ministers, which is the supreme executive authority in the country. The Council of Ministers also initiates legislation.

Elections
In 2003, Qatar adopted a constitution that provided for the direct election of 30 of the 45 members of a legislature. However, the legislature has limited powers to reject legislation and dismiss ministers. The government remains authoritarian. The Shura Council held its first general election in October 2021 after several postponements, but in November 2024 it went back to being fully appointed by the emir, ending the country's "short-lived experiment in electing members of the advisory Shura Council".
According to the 2025 Democracy Report of V-Dem Democracy indices, Qatar was second-last on the Electoral Democracy Index among Middle Eastern countries, and seventh-last worldwide from among the 179 countries rated. Qatari law does not permit the establishment of political bodies or trade unions. Additionally, according to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Qatar performs in the low range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in political representation, including credible elections, inclusive suffrage and effective parliament.

Law
According to Qatar's Constitution, Sharia law is the main source of Qatari legislation, although in practice Qatar's legal system is a mixture of civil law and Sharia. Sharia is applied to family law, inheritance, and several criminal acts (including adultery, robbery, and murder). In some cases, Sharia-based family courts treat a female's testimony as being worth half that of a man. Codified family law was introduced in 2006. Islamic polygyny is permitted.
Judicial corporal punishment is a punishment in Qatar. Only Muslims considered medically fit are liable to have such sentences carried out. Flogging is employed as a punishment for alcohol consumption or illicit sexual relations. Article 88 of the criminal code declares that the penalty for adultery is 100 lashes. Stoning is a legal punishment in Qatar, and apostasy and homosexuality are crimes punishable by the death penalty; however, the penalty has not been carried out for either crime. Blasphemy can result in up to seven years in prison, while proselytising can incur a 10-year sentence.
Alcohol consumption is partially legal; some five-star luxury hotels are allowed to sell alcohol to non-Muslim customers. Muslims are not allowed to consume alcohol, and those caught consuming it are liable to flogging or deportation. Non-Muslim expatriates can obtain a permit to purchase alcohol for personal consumption. The Qatar Distribution Company (a subsidiary of Qatar Airways) is permitted to import alcohol and pork; it operates the only liquor store in the country, which also sells pork to holders of liquor licences. Qatari officials had indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in "fan zones" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup. However, on 18 November, two days before the start of the games, Qatari officials announced alcoholic beverages would not be permitted within the stadiums.
In 2014, a modesty campaign was launched to remind tourists of the country's restrictive dress code. Female tourists were advised not to wear leggings, miniskirts, sleeveless dresses, or short or tight clothing in public. Men were warned against wearing shorts and singlets.

Administrative divisions
Qatar is divided into eight municipalities. The municipalities are further subdivided into 98 zones, which are in turn subdivided into blocks.

Foreign relations
Qatar's international profile and active role in international affairs have led some analysts to identify it as a middle power. Regional relations and foreign policies are characterised by the strategy of balancing and alliance building among regional and great powers. It maintains independent foreign policy and engages in regional balancing to secure its strategic priorities and to have recognition on the regional and international level. As a comparatively small state in the gulf, Qatar established an "open-door" foreign policy where Qatar maintains ties to all parties and regional players in the region. Diplomatic missions to Qatar are based in its capital, Doha.
Since 2022, it has been a major non-NATO ally of the United States. Qatar also has particularly strong ties with France, China, Iran, Turkey, as well as a number of Islamist movements in the Middle East such as the Muslim Brotherhood. The country is an early member of OPEC and a founding member of the Gulf Cooperation Council, as well as a member of the Arab League. The country has led numerous investments and economic cooperations with Iraq, Syria and Palestine. Qatar supported opposition groups in Libya and Syria and participated in Saudi-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former president Ali Abdullah Saleh. In 2022, four people were arrested because of corruption. This came to be known as the Qatar corruption scandal at the European Parliament.
Since the 2000s, Qatar increasingly emerged on a wider foreign policy stage especially as a mediator for Middle Eastern conflicts. Qatar mediated between the rival Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas in 2006 and helped unite Lebanese leaders into forming a political agreement during the 2008 crisis. It has also emerged as mediators in African and Asian affairs, notably holding a peace process for Sudan amid the Darfur conflict and facilitating peace talks for Afghanistan, setting up a political "office" for Taliban to facilitate talks. Ahmed Rashid, writing in the Financial Times, stated that through the office Qatar has "facilitated meetings between the Taliban and many countries and organisations, including the U.S state department, the UN, Japan, several European governments and non-governmental organisations, all of whom have been trying to push forward the idea of peace talks." It played a major role in establishing the first ceasefire in the Gaza war and the concurrent initial hostage exchange. These high-risk diplomatic middle man endeavours (and its own rigorous defence stance) have thus earned it a reputation as "a prickly Switzerland".
On 2 October 2020, Qatari authorities strip-searched 13 Australian women on a plane at Hamad International Airport over a premature baby found in a bathroom at the terminal. This caused an international incident with Australia. In September 2023, Qatar mediated the US-Iran prisoners swap deal. Iran freed five Americans in exchange for five Iranians held in the US and transfer $6 billion in frozen Iranian money from South Korea to Qatar. In October 2023 United States President Joe Biden thanked the Qatar's Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani for his help in mediating a landmark prisoner swap deal with Iran. On 24 September 2024, Qatar was designated as the first Gulf country to join the U.S. Visa Waiver Programme (VWP), allowing its citizens to travel to the United States for up to 90 days for business or tourism without a visa. The inclusion strengthens security cooperation between the two nations and eases travel for Qatari citizens. U.S. citizens are now permitted to stay in Qatar for up to 90 days without a visa, an increase from the previous 30-day limit.

Military
The Qatar Armed Forces consist of 12,000 personnel in the Qatari Emiri Land Forces, 2,500 in the Navy, 2,000 in the Air Force, and 5,000 in the Internal Security Forces. After the Arab spring events in 2011 and a diplomatic incident with Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries in 2014, Qatar started expanding its armed forces. The country introduced conscription in 2013, the first Gulf state to do so in recent years, and extended the service term in 2018, requiring male Qatari citizens who are called up to serve one year. About 2,000 conscripts pass through the Qatar Armed Forces annually. 
In 2008 Qatar spent US$2.6 billion on its military, which was 2% of the GDP, and its military spending increased to US$7.49 billion as of 2022. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) found that in 2010–2014 Qatar was the 46th-largest arms importer in the world. SIPRI writes that Qatar's plans to transform and significantly enlarge its armed forces have accelerated. In 2015, Qatar was the 16th largest arms importer in the world, and in 2016, it was the 11th largest, according to SIPRI. Since 2017, Qatar has purchased large quantities of equipment from European countries and the United States, making its air force one of the largest among the Gulf states. According to research published in November 2024, Qatar has dramatically increased its military power, as its expenditure grew by 434%. Corruption in arms trading, especially bribery, has been one consequence. 
Qatar has signed defence pacts with the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. The forward headquarters of United States Central Command, Al Udeid Air Base, is located in Qatar and houses about 10,000 American military personnel. During the 2011 military intervention in Libya, Qatar deployed six Mirage 2000 fighter jets to assist the NATO air campaign against the Libyan government and special forces to provide training to Libyan rebels. During the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war from 2015, Qatar sent 1,000 troops, 200 armoured vehicles, and 30 Apache helicopters to assist with Saudi military operations. Qatar withdrew its forces from Yemen due to the diplomatic crisis with Saudi Arabia in 2017. Qatar is the 29th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

Human rights
Qatar's human rights record has been regarded by academics and non-governmental organisations as being generally poor, with restrictions on civil liberties such as the freedoms of association, expression and the press, as well as its treatment of thousands of migrant workers amounting to forced labour for projects in the country.
In May 2012, Qatari officials declared their intention to allow the establishment of an independent trade union. In 2014, Qatar commissioned international law firm DLA Piper to produce a report investigating the immigrant labour system. In May 2014, DLA Piper released more than 60 recommendations for reforming the kafala system including the abolition of exit visas and the introduction of a minimum wage, which Qatar has pledged to implement. Qatar also announced it would scrap its sponsor system for foreign labour, which requires that all foreign workers be sponsored by local employers.
The UN Committee Against Torture found that the provisions for flogging and stoning within the Qatari criminal code constituted a breach of the obligations imposed by the UN Convention Against Torture. Homosexual acts are illegal and can be punished by death. However, there is no such evidence that the death penalty has been given for same-sex relations due to homosexual acts.
Under the provisions of Qatar's sponsorship law, sponsors had the unilateral power to cancel workers' residency permits, deny workers' ability to change employers, report a worker as "absconded" to police authorities, and deny permission to leave the country. As a result, sponsors may restrict workers' movements, and workers may be afraid to report abuses or claim their rights. According to the ITUC, the visa sponsorship system allows the exaction of forced labour by making it difficult for a migrant worker to leave an abusive employer or travel overseas without permission. Qatar also did not maintain wage standards for its immigrant labourers. Additional changes to labour laws include a provision guaranteeing that all workers' salaries are paid directly into their bank accounts and new restrictions on working outdoors in the hottest hours during the summer.
In 2016 laws were reformed to mandate that companies that fail to pay workers' wages on time could temporarily lose their ability to hire more employees. Human Rights Watch claimed that the changes might fail to address some labour rights issues. A minimum wage was instituted in 2021. The country enfranchised women at the same time as men in connection with the 1999 elections for a Central Municipal Council. These elections—the first-ever in Qatar—were intentionally held on 8 March 1999, International Women's Day.
As of 2024 Qatar is still ranked 40 out of 180 countries in the Corruption Perceptions Index. As of 2025 Qatar continues to face global criticism for ongoing labour abuses. Many migrant employees still suffer wage theft and harsh work, and they cannot form unions. Women and LGBTQ+ people face legal and social discrimination. The United Nations has issued hundreds of human rights recommendations to Qatar. The country also limits free speech and peaceful assembly.

Economy
Before the discovery of oil, the economy focused on fishing and pearl hunting. A report prepared by local governors of the Ottoman Empire in 1892 states that income from pearl hunting in 1892 is 2,450,000 kran. After the introduction of the Japanese cultured pearl onto the world market in the 1920s and 1930s, Qatar's pearling industry crashed. Oil was discovered in Qatar in 1940, in Dukhan Field. The discovery transformed the state's economy. Now, the country has a high standard of living for its legal citizens. With no income tax, Qatar has one of the lowest tax rates in the world. The unemployment rate in June 2013 was 0.1%. Corporate law mandates that Qatari nationals must hold 51% of any venture in the emirate. Trade and industry is overseen by the Ministry of Business and Trade.
As of 2016, Qatar has the fourth highest GDP per capita in the world, according to the International Monetary Fund. It relies heavily on foreign labour to grow its economy, to the extent that migrant workers compose 86% of the population and 94% of the workforce. Economic growth has been almost exclusively based on its petroleum and natural gas industries, which began in 1940. Qatar is the leading exporter of liquefied natural gas. In 2012, it was estimated that Qatar would invest over $120 billion in the energy sector in the next 10 years. The country was a member state of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), having joined in 1961, and having left in January 2019.

In 2012, Qatar retained its title of richest country in the world (according to per capita income) for the third time in a row, having first overtaken Luxembourg in 2010. According to the study published by the Washington-based Institute of International Finance, the per capita GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) was $106,000 (QR387,000) in 2012, helping the country retain its ranking as the world's wealthiest nation. Luxembourg came a distant second with nearly $80,000 and Singapore third with per capita income of about $61,000.The research put Qatar's GDP at $182bn in 2012 and said it had climbed to an all-time high due to soaring gas exports and high oil prices. Its population stood at 1.8 million in 2012.

Established in 2005, Qatar Investment Authority is the country's sovereign wealth fund, specialising in foreign investment. In 2012, with assets of $115bn, QIA was ranked 12th among the richest sovereign wealth funds in the world. With billions of dollars in surpluses from the oil and gas industry, the Qatari government has directed investments into United States, Europe, and Asia Pacific. Qatar Holding is the international investment arm of QIA. Since 2009, Qatar Holding has received $30–40bn per year from the state. As of 2014, it has investments around the world in Valentino, Siemens, Printemps, Harrods, The Shard, Barclays Bank, Heathrow Airport, Paris Saint-Germain F.C., Volkswagen Group, Royal Dutch Shell, Bank of America, Tiffany, Agricultural Bank of China, Sainsbury's, BlackBerry, and Santander Brasil.
The country has no taxes on non-companies, but authorities have announced plans to levy taxes on junk food and luxury items. The taxes would be implemented on goods that harm the human body—for example, fast food, tobacco products, and soft drinks. The rollout of these initial taxes is believed to be the result of the fall in oil prices and a deficit that the country faced in 2016. Additionally, the country saw job cuts in 2016 from its petroleum companies and other sectors in the government.
As part of Qatar National Vision 2030, the country is making its economy less dependent on oil and gas by expanding its range of industries. Funds are being put into projects related to schooling, tourism, and green energy. Qatar is putting a lot of effort into green energy. By 2030, they want 20% of their energy to come from solar power. As part of the economic transformation, the tourist industry is growing, which helps the GDP grow and makes the country less reliant on oil exports.

Energy
As of 2016, Qatar's proven oil reserves were estimated at 25.2 billion barrels, positioning it as the 13th largest globally, accounting for approximately 1.53% of the world's total reserves.
Qatar's proven reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 250 trillion cubic feet (7,000 km3). The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development. In 1996, the Qatargas project began exporting liquefied natural gas to Japan.
Qatar's heavy industrial projects, all based in Umm Said, include a refinery with a 50,000 barrels (8,000 m3) per day capacity, a fertiliser plant for urea and ammonia, a steel plant, and a petrochemical plant. All these industries use gas for fuel. Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned QatarEnergy. The US is the major equipment supplier for Qatar's oil and gas industry, and US companies are playing a major role in North Field gas development.

In 2008 Qatar launched its National Vision 2030 which highlights environmental development as one of the four main goals for Qatar over the next two decades. The National Vision pledges to develop sustainable alternatives to oil-based energy to preserve the local and global environment. Qatar has made investment in renewable resources a major goal for the country over the next two decades. By 2030, Qatar has set the goal of attaining 20% of its energy from solar power. The country is well-positioned to capitalise on photovoltaic systems, as it has a global horizontal irradiance value of approximately 2,140 kWh per square metre annually. Furthermore, the direct irradiance parameter is roughly 2,008 kWh per square metre annually, implying that it would be able to benefit from concentrated solar power as well. Qatar Foundation has been active in helping the solar power goals. It established Qatar Solar, which, together with Qatar Development Bank and German company SolarWorld, embarked on a joint venture resulting in the creation of Qatar Solar Technologies (QSTec). In 2017, QSTec commissioned its polysilicon plant in Ras Laffan. This plant has a capacity of 1.1 MW of solar power.
Qatar pursues a vigorous programme of "Qatarisation", under which all joint venture industries and government departments strive to move Qatari nationals into positions of greater authority. Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the US, are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates. To control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programmes over the past several years. Security is the principal basis for Qatar's strict entry and immigration rules and regulations.
On March 2, 2026, on the third day of the Iran war, the Qatari Ministry of Defence announced that Ras Laffan Industrial City and Mesaieed Industrial Area were struck by two Iranian drones. QatarEnergy soon announced that it has ceased all production of natural gas and its associated products, reportedly on order by Energy Minister Saad Sherida al-Kaabi. It later announced that it was declaring Force Majeure on its contracts with buyers, and internal sources speaking to Reuters said that it would soon be shutting down gas liquefication, and that restarting it would take weeks. These announcements caused increases in world gas prices, which analysts said was a part of the Iranian government's plan to apply pressure on the world to stop the war. On March 6, al-Kaabi warned that if the war continues other Gulf energy producers may be forced to halt exports and declare Force Majeure, and that "this will bring down economies of the world". This announcement caused a jump in global oil prices.
On March 6, it was reported that according to satellite imagery analysis by both Bloomberg and the Energy Economics and Society Research Institute in Tokyo, Ras Laffan, the main gas facility in Qatar, appears to have not been damaged before the "unprecedented shutdown" which sent fuel prices higher.

Tourism
Qatar is one of the fastest growing countries in the field of tourism. According to the World Tourism rankings, more than 2.3 million international tourists visited in 2017. Qatar has become one of the most open countries in the Middle East due to its recent visa facilitation improvements, including allowing nationals of 88 countries to enter visa-free and free-of charge. Qatar was recently put in the top eight in market climate in the Middle East by the Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Survey 2019 of the World Economic Forum.
Doha is one of the fastest-growing hotel and hospitality markets in the world. The $220 billion spent on infrastructure since the successful World Cup bid of 2010 has helped boost the industry. Hotels have also been helped by the country's geographic location. The tourism sector continues to witness a strong recovery with more than 729,000 international visitors in the first half of 2022, marking a 19% increase compared to the full year of 2021, and the aim is to raise tourism to 12% of GDP by 2030. 
The tourist industry in Doha has grown rapidly, making it a hub for international tourists. The Museum of Islamic Art, Souq Waqif, and the Katara Cultural Village are among the most popular places to visit. Nationals of 88 countries are able to enter Qatar without a visa, making it one of the most accessible destinations in the Middle East. The government has set goals to increase the share of tourism towards its GDP to 12% by 2030, contributed to by its hosting of major sporting events such as the 2022 FIFA World Cup and the upcoming 2030 Asian Games.
The nation is also on course to experience a major jump in athletic and corporate tourism with hosting world-class tournaments such as the 2030 Asian Games and the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Qatar Airways, as well as Hamad International Airport, provide travellers with one of the best transportation services in the world, and this has increased tourism in Qatar. Gulf News, a research centre in Qatar, by examining the statistics of recent years and upcoming events, has predicted that the country will earn 11 billion and 900 million dollars from attracting foreign travellers by 2020. The reason for this upward trend is the increase in hospitality and attention to the country's culture in Qatar.

Transport
Qatar has significantly developed its transportation infrastructure to enhance global connectivity and support economic growth. Key developments include expansions of Hamad International Airport (DOH), enhancements to Qatar Airways' fleet, and the development of Hamad Port.
DOH, Qatar's largest international airport and the primary hub for the nation's flag carrier, Qatar Airways, was constructed in 2014 to replace the aging Doha International Airport. Since commencing operations on 30 April 2014, the airport has undergone substantial expansions to accommodate increasing passenger traffic. The first phase, launched in 2022, introduced a new terminal, hotel, and the ORCHARD tropical garden. The subsequent phase aims to boost capacity to 70 million passengers and includes a new cargo terminal.  

Qatar Airways, which operates all regularly scheduled commercial flights through DOH, won Airline of the Year in 2011, 2012, 2015, 2017, and 2019, and employs over 46,000 people.  The airline also  plans to place a significant aircraft order to increase annual passenger numbers from 50 million to 80 million over the next five to six years. This expansion is expected to enhance the airline's global network and services.

Qatar is increasingly activating its logistics and ports in order to participate in trade between Europe and China or Africa. For this purpose, ports such as Hamad Port are rapidly expanded and investments are made in their technology. The country is historically and currently part of the Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast to the south via the southern tip of India to Mombasa, from there through the Red Sea via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, there to the Upper Adriatic region to the northern Italian hub of Trieste with its rail connections to Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the North Sea. Hamad Port is Qatar's main seaport, located south of Doha in the Umm Al Houl area. Construction of the port began in 2010; it became operational in December 2016. Capable of handling up to 7.8 million tonnes of products annually, the bulk of trade which passes through the port consists of food and building materials. On the northern coast, Ras Laffan Port serves as the most extensive liquid natural gas export facility in the world.
Qatar has made significant progress in public transportation, with the Doha Metro being one of the most important components of the system. The metro system connects important parts of the capital, like Hamad International Airport and major business hubs, providing a convenient method of transportation. More expansions are being planned by Qatar Rail to improve connections across the region.

Demographics
The number of people in Qatar fluctuates considerably depending on the season, since the country relies heavily on migrant labour. In 2020, the population was over 2.8 million, with foreigners making up a vast majority. Only around 340,000 (12%) were Qatari citizens, while the remaining 2.5 million were expatriates.
According to a report from 2017, the combined number of South Asians (from the countries of the Indian subcontinent including Sri Lanka) represented over 1.5 million people (60%). Among these, Indians were the largest community, numbering 650,000 in 2017, followed by 350,000 Nepalese, 280,000 Bangladeshis, 145,000 Sri Lankans, and 125,000 Pakistanis. The contingent of expatriates who were not of South Asian origin represented around 28% of Qatar's population, of which the largest group is 260,000 Filipinos and 200,000 Egyptians, plus many other nationalities (including nationals of other Arab countries, Europeans, etc.).
Qatar's first demographic records date back to 1892, conducted by Ottoman governors in the region. Based on this census, which includes only the residents in cities, the population in 1892 was 9,830. At the time of the first census, held in 1970, the population was 111,133. The 2020 census recorded the total population at 2,846,118, of which 2,034,518 were males and 811,600 females. The influx of male labourers has skewed the gender balance, and women are now just one-quarter of the population.

Languages
Arabic is the official language, with Qatari Arabic being the local dialect. Qatari Sign Language is the language of the native Qatari deaf community. English is commonly used as a second language, and a rising lingua franca, especially in commerce, to the extent that steps are being taken to try to preserve Arabic from English's encroachment. English is particularly useful for communication with Qatar's large expatriate community. In the medical community, and in situations such as the training of nurses to work in Qatar, English acts as a lingua franca. Reflecting the multicultural make-up of the country, many other languages are also spoken, including Malayalam, Persian, Baluchi, Brahui, Hindi, Urdu, Pashto, Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Nepali, Sinhalese, Bengali, Tagalog, Tulu and Indonesian.

Religion
Islam is predominant and is the state religion, although it is not the only religion practiced in the country, and the constitution guarantees freedom to practise any faith within "moral" bounds. Most citizens belong to the Salafi Muslim movement of Wahhabism, and 5–15% of Muslims follow Shia Islam with other Islamic sects being very small in number. In 2020, Qatar's total population (citizens and non-citizens alike) was 75.9% Muslim, 12.5% Christian and 10.6% Hindu; while other religions and religiously unaffiliated people accounted for the remaining 0.9%.
Sharia is the main source of legislation according to the constitution. Qatar's interpretation of Sharia is said to be not as "strict" as neighbouring Saudi Arabia but not as "liberal" as Dubai. The vision of the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs is "to build a contemporary Islamic society along with fostering the Sharee’ah [Sharia] and cultural heritage".
The non-Muslim population is composed almost entirely of non-citizens. Since 2008, Christians have been allowed to build churches on ground donated by the government. Active churches include the Mar Thoma Church, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Rosary and the Anglican Church of the Epiphany. There are also two Mormon wards and a Baháʼí Faith community.

Education
Qatar hired the RAND Corporation to reform its K–12 education system. Through the Qatar Foundation, the country has built Education City, a campus that hosts local branches of the Weill Cornell Medical College, Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, Northwestern's Medill School of Journalism, Texas A&M's School of Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts and other Western institutions.
The illiteracy rate was 3.1% for males and 4.2% for females in 2012, the lowest in the Arabic-speaking world and 86th in the world. Citizens are required to attend government-provided education from kindergarten through high school. Qatar University, founded in 1973, is the country's oldest and largest institution of higher education.
In November 2002, Emir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani created The Supreme Education Council. The Council directs and controls education for all ages from the pre-school level through the university level, including the "Education for a New Era" initiative which was established to try to position Qatar as a leader in education reform. According to the Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, the top-ranking universities in the country are Qatar University (1,881st worldwide), Texas A&M University at Qatar (3,905th) and Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar (6,855th).

In 2009, Qatar established the Qatar Science & Technology Park in Education City to link those universities with industry. Education City is also home to a fully accredited international Baccalaureate school, Qatar Academy. In addition, two Canadian institutions, the College of the North Atlantic (headquarters in Newfoundland and Labrador) and the University of Calgary, have inaugurated campuses in Doha. Other for-profit universities have also established campuses in the city.
In 2012, Qatar was ranked third from the bottom of the 65 OECD countries participating in the PISA test of mathematics, reading and skills for 15- and 16-year-olds, despite having the highest per capita income in the world. Qatar was ranked 48th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, up from 65th in 2019.
As part of its national development strategy, Qatar has outlined a 10-year strategic plan to improve the level of education. The government has launched educational outreach programs, such as Al-Bairaq. Al-Bairaq was launched in 2010 aims to provide high school students with an opportunity to experience a research environment in the Center for Advanced Materials in Qatar University. The programme encompasses the STEM fields and languages.
Launched in 2006 as part of an initiative of the Qatar Foundation, the Qatar National Research Fund was created with the intent of securing public funds for scientific research. The fund functions as a means to diversify its economy from a primarily oil and gas-based one to a knowledge-based economy. The Qatar Science & Technology Park (QSTP) was established by Qatar Foundation in March 2009 as an attempt to assist the country's transition towards a knowledge economy. With a seed capital of $800 million and initially hosting 21 organisations, the QSTP became Qatar's first free-trade zone.

Health
Healthcare standards are generally high. Qatari citizens are covered by a national health-insurance plan, while expatriates must either receive health insurance from their employers, or in the case of the self-employed, purchase insurance. Government healthcare spending is among the highest in the Middle East, with $4.7 billion being invested in healthcare in 2014. This was a $2.1 billion increase from 2010. The premier healthcare provider is Hamad Medical Corporation, established by the government as a non-profit healthcare provider, which runs a network of hospitals, ambulance services, and a home healthcare service, all of which are accredited by the Joint Commission.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 2.2% of the country's GDP; the highest in the Middle East. In 2006, there were 23.12 physicians and 61.81 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 82.08 years in 2014, or 83.27 years for males and 77.95 years for females, rendering it the highest life expectancy in the Middle East. Qatar has a low infant mortality rate of 7 in 100,000.
In 2006, there were 25 beds per 10,000 people, and 27.6 doctors and 73.8 nurses per 10,000 people. In 2011, the number of beds decreased to 12 per 10,000 people, whereas the number of doctors increased to 28 per 10,000 people. While the country has one of the lowest proportions of hospital beds in the region, the availability of physicians is the highest in the GCC.

Culture
The culture of Qatar is similar to other countries in Eastern Arabia, being significantly influenced by Islam. Qatar National Day, hosted annually on 18 December, has had an important role in developing a sense of national identity. It is observed in remembrance of Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani's succession to the throne and his subsequent unification of the country's various tribes.
The Doha Cultural Festival is one of the cultural activities carried out annually by the Qatari Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage, which began in 2002 with the aim of spreading Qatari culture inside and outside Qatar.

Arts
Qatari officials, especially the Al Thani family and the sister of the Emir of Qatar, Al-Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, pay special attention to art. Al-Mayassa leads the Qatar Museums Authority. The Museum of Islamic Art, opened in 2008, is regarded as one of the best museums in the region. This and several other Qatari museums, like the Arab Museum of Modern Art, fall under the Qatar Museums Authority, which also sponsors artistic events abroad, such as major exhibitions by Takahashi Murakami in Versailles (2010) and Damien Hirst in London (2012).

Qatar is the world's biggest buyer in the art market by value. The Qatari cultural sector is being developed to enable the country to reach world recognition to contribute to the development of a country that comes mainly from its resources from the gas industry.

Literature
Qatari literature traces its origins back to the 19th century. Originally, written poetry was the most common form of expression. Abdul Jalil Al-Tabatabai and Mohammed bin Abdullah bin Uthaymeen, two poets dating back to the early 19th century, formed the corpus of Qatar's earliest written poetry. Poetry later fell out of favour after Qatar began reaping the profits from oil exports in the mid-20th century and many Qataris abandoned their Bedouin traditions in favour of more urban lifestyles.
Due to the increasing number of Qataris who began receiving formal education during the 1950s and other significant societal changes, 1970 witnessed the introduction of the first short story anthology, and in 1993 the first locally authored novels were published. Poetry, particularly the predominant nabati form, retained some importance but would soon be overshadowed by other literary types. Unlike most other forms of art in Qatari society, women have been involved in the modern literature movement to a similar extent to men.

Media
Qatar's media was classified as "not free" in the 2014 Freedom of the Press report by Freedom House. Television broadcasting started in 1970 with the inauguration of Qatar TV. Al Jazeera is a main television network headquartered in Doha. Al Jazeera initially launched in 1996 as an Arabic news and current affairs satellite TV channel of the same name and has since expanded into a global network of several speciality TV channels.
It has been reported that journalists practice self-censorship, particularly in regards to the government and ruling family of Qatar. Criticism of the government, emir, and ruling family in the media is illegal. According to article 46 of the press law "The Emir of the state of Qatar shall not be criticised and no statement can be attributed to him unless under a written permission from the manager of his office." Journalists are also subject to prosecution for insulting Islam.
In 2014, a Cybercrime Prevention Law was passed. The law is said to restrict press freedom and carries prison sentences and fines for broad reasons such as jeopardising local peace or publishing false news. The Gulf Centre for Human Rights has stated that the law is a threat to freedom of speech and has called for certain articles of the law to be revoked.
Press media has undergone expansion in recent years. There are currently seven newspapers in circulation in Qatar, with four being published in Arabic and three being published in English. There are also newspapers from India, Nepal and Sri Lanka with editions printed from Qatar.
In regards to telecommunication infrastructure, Qatar is the highest-ranked Middle Eastern country in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI)—an indicator for determining the development level of a country's information and communication technologies. Qatar ranked number 23 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking, unchanged from 2013.

Music
The music of Qatar is based on Bedouin poetry, song and dance. Traditional dances in Doha are performed on Friday afternoons; one such dance is the Ardah, a stylised martial dance performed by two rows of dancers who are accompanied by an array of percussion instruments, including al-ras (a large drum whose leather is heated by an open fire), tambourines and cymbals with small drums. Other percussion instruments used in folk music include galahs (a tall clay jar) and tin drinking cups known as tus or tasat, usually used in conjunction with a tabl, a longitudinal drum beaten with a stick. String instruments, such as the oud and rebaba, are also commonly used.

Sport
Association football is the most popular sport in Qatar, both in terms of players and spectators. Shortly after the Qatar Football Association became affiliated with FIFA in 1970, one of the country's earliest international accolades came in 1981 when the Qatar national under-20 team's emerged as runners-up to West Germany in that year's edition of the FIFA World Youth Championship after being defeated 4–0 in the final. At the senior level, Qatar has played host to three editions of the AFC Asian Cup; the first being the ninth edition in 1988, the second being the fifteenth edition held in 2011, and the third being the eighteenth edition held in 2023. For the first time in the country's history, the Qatar national football team won the AFC Asian Cup in the 2019 edition hosted in the United Arab Emirates, beating Japan 3–1 in the final. They won all seven of their matches, conceding only a single goal throughout the tournament. As hosts and defending champions in the following 2023 edition, Qatar successfully retained their title, defeating Jordan in the final.
On 2 December 2010, Qatar won their bid to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup, despite never previously qualifying for the FIFA World Cup Finals. Local organisers built seven new stadiums and expanded one existing stadium for this event. Qatar's winning bid for the 2022 World Cup was greeted enthusiastically in the Persian Gulf region as it was the first time a country in the Middle East had been selected to host the tournament. At the same time, the bid was embroiled in much controversy, including allegations of bribery and interference in the investigation of the alleged bribery. European football associations also objected to the 2022 World Cup being held in Qatar for a variety of reasons, from the impact of warm temperatures on players' fitness, to the disruption it might cause in European domestic league calendars should the event be rescheduled to take place during winter. In May 2014, Qatari football official Mohammed bin Hammam was accused of making payments totalling £3 million to officials in return for their support for the Qatar bid. A FIFA inquiry into the bidding process in November 2014 cleared Qatar of any wrongdoing.

The Guardian, a British national daily newspaper, produced a short documentary named "Abuse and exploitation of migrant workers preparing emirate for 2022". A 2014 investigation by The Guardian reported that migrant workers who had been constructing luxurious offices for the organisers of the 2022 World Cup had not been paid in over a year, and were now "working illegally from cockroach-infested lodgings". For 2014, Nepalese migrants involved in constructing infrastructure for the 2022 World Cup died at a rate of one every two days. The Qatar 2022 organising committee responded to various allegations by claiming that hosting the World Cup in Qatar would act as a "catalyst for change" in the region. According to a February 2021 article in The Guardian, some 6,500 migrant construction workers had died. However, the World Cup in Qatar was the most expensive in the competition's history and had many modern technologies, with many expressing their satisfaction with the country's handling of the tournament.
Qatar was estimated to host a football fanbase of 1.6 million for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. However, the construction work in country was expected to only take the available 37,000 hotel rooms to 70,000 by the end of 2021. In December 2019, the Qatari World Cup officials approached the organisers of the Glastonbury Festival in England and the Coachella Festival in the United States, to plan huge desert campsites for thousands of football fans. The World Cup campsites on the outskirts were reported to have licensed bars, restaurants, entertainment and washing facilities. Moreover, two cruise ships were also reserved as temporary floating accommodations for nearly 40,000 people during the tournament.

Though football is the most popular sport, other team sports have experienced considerable success at senior level. In 2015, the national handball team emerged as runners-up to France in the World Men's Handball Championship as hosts, however the tournament was marred by numerous controversies regarding the host nation and its team. Further, in 2014, Qatar won the world championship in men's 3x3 basketball.
Cricket is popular amongst the South Asian diaspora in Qatar. Casual street cricket is the most popular format of the game, but the Qatar Cricket Association has been a member of the International Cricket Council (ICC) since 1999 and the men's and women's national teams both play regularly in ICC competitions. The primary cricket ground in Qatar is the West End Park International Cricket Stadium.
Basketball is a developed sport amongst Asian people in Qatar. Qatar hosted the 2005 FIBA Asia Championship, 2013 FIBA Asia 3x3 Championship, 2014 FIBA Asia Under-18 Championship and 2022 FIBA Under-16 Asian Championship. Qatar will host the 2027 FIBA Basketball World Cup making this become the first Arab country to host the FIBA Basketball World Cup.
Khalifa International Tennis and Squash Complex in Doha hosted the WTA Tour Championships in women's tennis between 2008 and 2010. Doha holds the WTA Premier tournament Qatar Ladies Open annually. Since 2002, Qatar has hosted the annual Tour of Qatar, a cycling race in six stages. Every February, riders are racing on the roads across Qatar's flat land for six days. Each stage covers a distance of more than 100 km, though the time trial usually is a shorter distance. Tour of Qatar is organised by the Qatar Cycling Federation for professional riders in the category of Elite Men.
The Qatar Army Skydiving Team has several different skydiving disciplines placing among the top nations in the world. The Qatar National Parachute team performs annually during Qatar's National Day and at other large events, such as the 2015 World Handball Championship.
Doha four times was the host of the official FIVB Volleyball Men's Club World Championship and three times host FIVB Volleyball Women's Club World Championship. Doha also hosted the Asian Volleyball Championship once.

See also
Internet in Qatar
List of Qatar-related topics
Outline of Qatar

Notes
References
Further reading
Al-Tamimi, Nawaf; Amin, Azzam; Zarrinabadi, Nourollah (2023). Qatar's Nation Branding and Soft Power: Exploring the Effects on National Identity and International Stance. Springer Nature. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-24651-7. ISBN 978-3-031-24651-7.
Bantekas, Ilias; Al-Ahmed, Ahmed (2023). Contract Law of Qatar. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781009052009.
Cochrane, Logan; Al-Hababi, Reem, eds. (2023). Sustainable Qatar: Social, Political and Environmental Perspectives. Gulf Studies. Vol. 9. Springer Nature. doi:10.1007/978-981-19-7398-7. ISBN 978-981-19-7398-7.
Scott-Jackson, Julie (2021). Qatar: Evidence of the Palaeolithic Earliest People Revealed. Archaeopress. ISBN 9781803270517.
Al-Kuwari, Maryam (2025). Tribal Reawakening and the Future of State-Building in Kuwait and Qatar. Gulf Studies. Vol. 20. Springer Nature. doi:10.1007/978-981-97-9663-2. ISBN 978-981-97-9663-2.
Zaidan, Esmat; Tok, Evren; Al-Fadala, Asmaa; Cochrane, Logan, eds. (2025). The Future of Education Policy in the State of Qatar. Gulf Studies. Vol. 21. Springer Nature. doi:10.1007/978-981-97-9667-0. ISBN 978-981-97-9667-0.
Elbanna, Said; Elsharnouby, Tamer; Aljafari, Abdullah; Fatima, Tahniyath, eds. (2025). The FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022: Unveiling Insights Beyond the Pitch. Springer Nature. ISBN 978-981-97-8414-1.

External links

Amiri Diwan (official government website).
Qatar. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Qatar web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries
Qatar from the BBC News.
 Wikimedia Atlas of Qatar
Key Development Forecasts for Qatar from International Futures.

## Tourism in Qatar
The economy of Qatar is one of the highest in the world based on GDP per capita, ranking generally among the top ten richest countries on world rankings for 2015 and 2016 data compiled by the World Bank, the United Nations, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Qatar is sometimes considered as having a mixed economy system.
Petroleum and natural gas are the cornerstones of Qatar's economy and account for more than 70% of total government revenue, more than 60% of gross domestic product, and roughly 85% of export earnings. Qatar has the world's third largest proven natural gas reserve and is the third-largest exporter of natural gas.

Energy sector
Before the emergence of petrol-based industry, Qatar was a poor pearl diving country. The exploration of oil and gas fields began in 1939. In 1973, oil production and revenues increased dramatically, moving Qatar out of the ranks of the world's poorest countries and providing it with one of the highest per capita incomes in the world.
Qatar's economy was in a downturn from 1982 to 1989. OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) quotas on crude oil production, the lower price for oil, and the generally unpromising outlook on international markets reduced oil earnings. In turn, the Qatari government's spending plans had to be cut to match lower income. The resulting recessionary local business climate caused many firms to lay off expatriate staff. With the economy recovering in the 1990s, expatriate populations, particularly from Egypt and South Asia, have grown again.
Crude oil decline rates from existing fields are high, as all of Qatar’s oil fields are mature . However, large natural gas reserves have been located off Qatar's northeast coast. These offshore gas fields also may contain significant oil and condensate reserves. For example, the state owned QatarEnergy corporation found two offshore oil fields in the 1960s. At the time production was too expensive. However, technological development led to production over 30 years later.
The gas condensate can be refined to usual oil products in specialised refineries. The costs are a bit higher but it is normal today for companies to use the gas condensate too. Oil offshore production in 2008 for PS-2 and PS-3 blocks was about 31.1 million barrels (84,995 b/d). Joint Ventures facilities (PS-1, ALK, K & A): Combined oil production from these three joint venture production facilities in 2008 was 57.4 million barrels (156,873 b/d). Like with gas fields there are more offshore blocks which need to be explored and could increase the oil output. So the 500,000 bpd peak and a depletion in 2023 is delayed. With higher oil prices it is expected that the offshore exploration of oil and/or natural gas fields will go on. Oil production in June 2016 seemed to be around 670,000 barrels per day, a bit down from February 2016 production of 692,000 barrels per day. Taking all liquids together Qatar is already far beyond a million barrels per day.
Qatar's proved reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 7000 km3 (250 trillion cubic feet). The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development. In 1996, the Qatargas project began exporting liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Japan. Further phases of North Field gas development costing billions of dollars are in various stages of planning and development.
Qatar's heavy industrial projects, all based in Umm Said, include a refinery with a 50,000 barrels (8,000 m3) per day capacity, a fertilizer plant for urea and ammonia, a steel plant, and a petrochemical plant. All these industries use gas for fuel. Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned QatarEnergy corporation (formerly QGPC). The U.S. is the major equipment supplier for Qatar's oil and gas industry, and U.S. companies are playing a major role in North Field gas development.
Qatar pursues a vigorous program of "Qatarization", under which all joint venture industries and government departments strive to move Qatari nationals into positions of greater authority. Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the U.S., are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates. In order to control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programs over the past several years. Security is the principal basis for Qatar's strict entry and immigration rules and regulations.

Industry
The government considers industry to be an integral part of its plan to diversify the economy and maximize its huge natural gas reserves, which serve as the primary feed stock for the sector. Accordingly, careful planning has gone into industrial development. With an eye towards exports, development has been clustered around the ports of Ras Laffan Industrial City and Mesaieed Industrial Area, which are key centers of energy. The result has seen considerable growth over the years. Industries Qatar (IQ), a producer of petrochemicals, fertilizers and steel, is a regional powerhouse, surpassed only in size by Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC), the Middle East's largest chemical producer. In 2007 the manufacturing sector made the third-largest contribution to GDP among non-oil and gas sectors, equivalent to about 7.5% of GDP. Industry in Qatar is regulated by the Ministry of Business and Trade.
Petrochemicals and fertilizers supply make up a large portion of the industrial base, along with steel and other construction materials, through Qatar Steel and Qatar Primary Material Company (QPMC). Indeed, over the past few years, demand for construction materials experienced a major surge as the development boom swept the Persian Gulf region. The 2008 financial crisis reduced demand in the region, as project credit lines dry up and investor sentiment remains cautious. The crisis impacted the whole of the industrial sector – IQ saw its net profit drop in the fourth quarter of 2008 more than 90% over the same period the previous year. But in relative terms, the sector has fared better than most and IQ still managed to post an annual profit of $2bn. Large profit chunks from years past have been channeled into capital investments, which should help the sector ride out the storm.

North Field LNG project
On 8 February 2021, the world's largest LNG supplier, Qatar Petroleum (now QatarEnergy), signed an EPC-contract with Chiyoda and Technip for the North Field East (NFE) expansion project to increase QE's annually LNG output by 40% until 2026. For the $28.7 billion NFE expansion project, QatarEnergy has partnered with five global energy companies that have acquired 25% stake in the project. These include Shell, TotalEnergies and ExxonMobil, each with 6.25%, and Eni and ConocoPhillips, each with 3.125% stakes. In a first phase, LNG export capacity is expected to increase from 77 million tons per year to 110 million tons per year by 2026.
On 20 June 2022, Minister of State for Energy Saad Sherida Al-Kaabi said that the expected production increase from this project will be 32.6 million tonnes annually. Ethane produced from the project would be 1.5 million tonnes per year, LPG 4 million tonnes per year, helium 5,000 tonnes per year, as well as 250,000 barrels of condensate per day.
In a second phase, the North Field South (NFS) project, Shell and TotalEnergies have each acquired 9.375% and ConocoPhillips 6.25% stakes. QatarEnergy plans to increase LNG production with the NFS project to 126 million tons per year beginning in 2028.
In April 2023, Sinopec acquired a 5% stake in an 8 million tonnes per year LNG train.

Financial sector
The Qatari banking sector managed to escape the direct impact of the global subprime fallout, but was not altogether unscathed by its aftershocks. Overall, it was the best performing of the Gulf Cooperation Council markets in the last quarter of 2008 and most banks posted substantial profits for 2008. But the sector is also facing issues of liquidity, declining customer confidence and a forced reluctance to lend. In a bid to strengthen the banks’ positions, the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) announced in early 2009 that it was willing to take a 10-20% stake in any interested local listed banks by way of a capital injection, although this was later reduced to 5% stakes and an additional 5% at the end of 2009.
The Qatari government also announced in March 2009 that it was planning to buy the investment portfolio of the banks in the hope this would encourage them to continue lending. Cautious sector sentiment has also been compounded by the Qatar Central Bank's (QCB's) lending restrictions, which demand a loan-to-deposit ratio of 90%. Given the high level of integration between Qatar's economy and the Persian Gulf region, as well as the wider world, a slowdown in business and banking activity seemed inevitable. Nevertheless, Qatar's banking sector has been faring relatively well, considering the strife experienced in other countries, and insiders are confident that activity will return to its previous brisk pace in the second half of 2009 as confidence slowly rebuilds around the globe.
The International Monetary Fund in its spring assessment 2019 said that Qatar has "successfully absorbed the shocks" of the blockade imposed in 2017 and the dropped oil prices from 2014 to 2016. S&P Global had marked Qatar's outlook to negative in 2017, but changed it to stable in 2019.
In August 2019, Qatar Central Bank stated that the country's economic growth will see a boost over the next two years amid expectations of stable oil prices and continued strong exports. The GDP is expected to grow at an average rate of 2.8% between 2018 and 2020, with the budget surplus falling to 4.35 billion riyals in 2019, from a surplus of 15.1 billion riyals in 2018.
Qatar's GDP is anticipated to scale up to $208 billion in 2024 from $162 billion in 2022, according to a report by FocusEconomics. The World Bank has projected Qatar's economy to be the fastest growing in the GCC in 2023 and 2024.

Islamic finance
The Islamic finance sector enjoyed increased activity in 2008 and is expected to continue to grow into 2009 as more sophisticated financial instruments spark the interest of investors. In addition to Islamic banks, such as Qatar Islamic Bank (QIB), Qatar International Islamic Bank (QIIB) and newcomer Masraf Al Rayyan, conventional banks have also been entering the sharia-compliant sector and are coming to view an Islamic subsidiary as a virtual necessity in order to maintain market standing. Islamic banks currently take the lion's share of sharia-compliant business, though the conventional banks are working hard to take a greater share of market activity. Both Islamic banks and Islamic subsidiaries did remarkably well in the first three quarters of 2008, during which overall financing activity increased by 70.6% compared to the same period in the previous year. The 2008 financial crisis slowed this growth. Poor market conditions have contributed to a marked slowdown of Islamic bond, or sukuk, activity in 2008 throughout the Persian Gulf. But other segments, such as Islamic insurance, or takaful, have not seen a similar downturn. Overall, challenges to further growth remain, including a lack of qualified staff to meet the growing demand for sharia-compliant banking services.

Capital market
The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Qatar was valued at $95,487 million in 2007 by the World Bank. As 2008 drew to a close, no capital markets around the globe, including Qatar's, were immune to the effects of the sub-prime fallout. That said, there is considerable optimism that Qatar's bourse, the Doha Securities Market (DSM), will remain relatively resilient to the ongoing international turbulence. It has followed the same peak-trough trajectory as many others around the globe, hitting record highs in mid-2008, before diving in late 2008 and early 2009. Between December 2006 and July 2008 the DSM Index rose about 117% before the 2008 financial crisis wiped out most of these gains. In the first few months of 2009, the DSM lost about 40% of its value. In an effort to stave off further losses, the government announced in February 2009 that it would step in to buy up shares of troubled banks amounting to about 10% of the market's capitalisation. The move improved investor optimism and is hoped to prevent the market from falling further. The proposal to create a single unified regulator as early as 2010 to oversee all banking and financial services is viewed as another promising development that will transform the financial sector for the better.

Real estate
Real estate is a significant and increasingly regulated sector of the Qatari economy, encompassing residential, commercial and mixed-use property and centred on the capital, Doha. Ownership of land was historically restricted to Qatari nationals, but reforms from the early 2000s, accelerating after Law No. 16 of 2018 on non-Qatari ownership and use of real estate, opened designated zones to non-Qatari individuals and companies. The sector is overseen by the Ministry of Justice and, since 2023, by a dedicated Real Estate Regulatory Authority known as Aqarat.

Non-Qatari ownership
Council of Ministers Decision No. 28 of 2020 implemented Law No. 16 of 2018 and designated twenty-five areas for non-Qatari ownership or use: nine freehold areas and sixteen usufruct areas where rights may be granted for up to 99 years, renewable by agreement. Freehold confers full ownership with rights to sell, mortgage and bequeath, while usufruct grants a long-term right to use and exploit the property. The freehold areas include Legtaifiya (West Bay Lagoon), The Pearl, Al Khor resort, Lusail, Al Kharaej, Jebel Thuaileb (Fox Hills), Al Dafna and Onaiza; the usufruct areas include Mushaireb, Freej Bin Mahmoud, Najma, Al Sadd and others within central Doha. Non-Qataris may additionally own a single residential unit in residential complexes and offices or shops in commercial complexes anywhere in the country, and vacant land must be built upon within four years of acquisition. Property ownership confers residency entitlements: holdings worth at least QAR 730,000 entitle the owner to a renewable residency permit without a local sponsor, while holdings of at least QAR 3,650,000 entitle the owner to permanent-residency-type benefits including healthcare, education and certain investment privileges.

Regulation and registration
All property dispositions creating, transferring or extinguishing real rights must be entered in the Real Estate Register, which is administered by the Real Estate Registration Department of the Ministry of Justice and which charges a transfer fee of 0.25% of the property value on sale. Law No. 5 of 2024 replaced the 1964 registration regime and introduced electronic registration for the first time, giving digital documents and signatures the same legal effect as paper originals; the law is delivered through the ministry's SAK e-services platform, with related online services hosted on the Hukoomi e-government portal. By Amiri Decision No. 28 of 2023 the Real Estate Regulatory Authority (Aqarat) was established under the Ministry of Municipality to license developers, brokers and property managers and to regulate off-plan sales, while the Qatar Central Bank compiles the Real Estate Price Index from Ministry of Justice transaction data.

Market and major developments
According to the National Planning Council's National Statistics Center, real estate activities grew by 6.3%, from QR 12.7 billion to QR 13.5 billion, in figures published in its March 2025 release on gross domestic product. Flagship freehold projects include The Pearl, an artificial island off Doha and the first area opened to non-Qatari freehold ownership; Lusail, a planned coastal city developed by Qatari Diar; and Msheireb Downtown Doha, a mixed-use regeneration of the historic city centre noted for one of the highest concentrations of LEED-certified buildings worldwide. Properties for sale and rent are marketed through licensed brokers and online portals, including the regional platform Property Finder and the Qatar-focused listings site Arady Qatar, which organises searches by Qatari municipal zone numbers and publishes indicative per-square-metre prices for land, apartments and villas across Qatar. Ownership and brokerage licensing can be verified through the Ministry of Justice and Aqarat.

Travel and tourism
Under the ambitious five-year development plan of the Qatar Tourism and Exhibitions Authority (QTEA), the government aimed to boost the number of visitors from 964,000 as of 2007 to 1.5m by 2010. The funding required to meet this goal was present in sufficient amounts; in 2008 the state allocated some $17bn for tourism development through 2014, most of which was allocated towards hotels, exhibition space and infrastructure. In order to keep up with a rising number of visitors, the government set a goal of increasing hotel capacity 400% by 2012. In addition to financial support, the government has also worked to ease business regulations in a bid to increase private sector activity. A major aspect of expansion plans is the Hamad International Airport, which has the capacity to handle up to 24m passengers.
Qatar Airways is an airline owned by the Qatar government and was founded in 1993. It travels to over a hundred destinations.
Other niche tourism segments receiving special focus include cultural tourism on the back of the high publicity opening of Doha's Museum of Islamic Art, and sports tourism, initially spurred by the Asian Games, to which Qatar played host in 2006. Qatar hosted the 2022 FIFA World cup.

Transport
With a fast-expanding population and substantial economic growth over the past decade, a reliable and extensive transportation network is becoming increasingly necessary within Qatar. So far the government, the primary transport developer, has done well in terms of keeping up with demand for new transportation options. In 2008 the Public Works Authority (Ashghal), one of the bodies that oversees infrastructure development, underwent a major reorganisation in order to streamline and modernise the authority in preparation for major project expansions across all segments in the near future. Ashghal works in tandem with the Urban Planning and Development Authority (UPDA), the body that designed the transportation master plan, instituted in March 2006 and running to 2025.

As driving is the primary mode of transport in Qatar, the road network is a major focus of the plan. Project highlights in this segment include the multibillion-dollar Doha Expressway and the Qatar Bahrain Causeway, which will connect Qatar to Bahrain and Saudi Arabia and is considered a milestone in regional interconnectivity. Mass-transit options, such as a Doha metro, light-rail system and more extensive bus networks, are also under development to ease road congestion. In addition, the railway system is being significantly expanded and could eventually form an integral part of a GCC-wide network linking all of the six member states. The airport, too, is expanding capacity to keep up with rising visitor numbers. The New Doha International Airport is one of the largest projects in Qatar today and will boast a capacity of 50m passengers upon completion in 2015. Finally, port infrastructure is seen as an integral part of Qatar's economic development as it focuses on LNG and industrial exports. The port at Mesaieed is undergoing expansion. While the 2008 financial crisis may present challenges to infrastructure development, once all projects are completed Qatar will have one of the most advanced and modern transport infrastructures in the region.

Macro-economic trend
Qatar is now among the richest countries in the world, on a per person basis. Current GDP per capita registered a world record-breaking peak growth of 1,156% in the 70s. This became quickly unsustainable due to the 1980s oil glut, and Qatar's current GDP per capita contracted 53% in the 80s. But rising global oil demand helped current GDP per capita to expand 94% in the 90s. Despite efforts to promote the non-hydrocarbon sectors and diversify the economy from hydrocarbons to knowledge-based sectors, the oil and gas sector has consistently contributed to at least 80 percent of the government of Qatar’s total revenues since 2014, as well as 90 percent of Qatar’s total exports.
In 2020 GDP PPP ~260 billion dollars.
This table is of Qatar's gross domestic product at market prices as estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Qatari Rials.

For purchasing power parity comparisons only, the US Dollar is exchanged at 3.67 Qatari Riyals. Mean wages were $59.99 per man-hour in 2009.
In February 2012, the International Bank of Qatar reported that GDP grew by 19.9% in 2011, but estimated that 2012 growth would slow to 9.8%
According to the International Monetary Fund, Qatar's economic performance improved in 2018 despite the economic embargo. The GDP growth is expected to increase to 2.6% in 2019 from 2.2% in 2018.
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024. Inflation below 2% is in green.

References
External links
WorldData.info page

## Culture of Qatar
The culture of Qatar is strongly influenced by traditional Bedouin culture, with less acute influence deriving from India, East Africa, and elsewhere in the Persian Gulf. The peninsula's arid climate compelled its population to place an emphasis on maritime activities within local culture. Arts and literature themes are often related to sea-based activities, particularly in Qatari folklore and music, with pearling trips serving as the main inspiration for music and traditional myths like May and Ghilân.
Although visual arts were historically unpopular due to Islam's stance on depictions of sentient beings, in the mid-20th century, this field has increased in popularity due to increased prosperity from oil exports. During this period, Qatari art flourished due to the efforts of artists such as Jassim Zaini and Yousef Ahmad, as well as support from quasi-governmental institutions such as the Qatari Fine Arts Society, the National Council for Culture, Arts, and Heritage, and in contemporary times, Qatar Museums. At the same time, Qatari literature saw the popularization of genres such as short stories and novels in the 1950s due to increasing educational opportunities. Qatari literature traces its origins to the 19th century, when the primary genre was Nabati poetry. Qatari women were particularly active in this field, breaking social norms, as women were historically less active in traditional forms of art.
The country's traditions and customs are primarily rooted in its history as an Arab-Islamic country. Nomadic pastoralism, principally of camels, and pearl fishing were once cornerstone livelihoods, with the Bedouin and Hadar (settled) communities each having distinct customs. The majlis, a communal gathering space used for storytelling and social interactions, is an important part of the culture. Cultural policies and affairs are regulated by the Ministry of Culture. The current minister is Abdulrahman bin Hamad bin Jassim bin Hamad Al Thani.

Arts and literature
Visual arts
The modern Qatari art movement emerged in the mid-20th century, largely in part due to the increased prosperity from oil exports. Traditionally, Islamic culture's aversion to depicting sentient beings restricted the advancement of the visual arts, with Qataris instead favoring art forms such as calligraphy, architecture, and textiles. However, in the 1950s and 1960, the government, particularly the Ministry of Education increased funding and support to the visual arts, including artists such as Jassim Zaini, Yousef Ahmad, Salman Al Malik, Faraj Daham and Ali Hassan. Institutions like the Qatari Fine Arts Society, established in 1980, and the National Council for Culture, Arts, and Heritage, established in 1998, further reinforced the modern art scene.

Qatar Museums was established in the early 2000s to centralize various museums and collections. Following this was the inauguration of several more major art institutions like the Museum of Islamic Art in 2008, Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art in 2010, and the National Museum of Qatar in 2019. Plans for additional museums were announced in 2022, including the Art Mill, Lusail Museum, and Qatar Auto Museum.
For the last twenty years, several members of the Al Thani family have advanced Qatar's global involvement in the arts. Qatar was revealed to be the world's biggest art buyer in 2011. Figures like Sheikha Al-Mayassa bint Hamad Al Thani, Sheikha Moza bint Nasser and Hassan bin Mohamed Al Thani have played significant roles in developing the country's art scene and its related institutions.
Contemporary cultural life in Qatar has expanded significantly with the development of major cultural institutions, including museums, galleries, and cultural festivals. These initiatives reflect the country's investment in positioning itself as a global cultural hub while also promoting local artistic production.

Architecture
The architecture of Qatar is similar to other Persian Gulf nations, and influenced by Islamic traditions. Features such as arches, niches, and intricately carved plaster patterns, as well as gypsum screens and battlements, are common. The hot desert climate heavily influenced the choice of materials, with rough stones from hills or coastal areas, bound together by clay, serving as primary building materials. Over time, clay was replaced with gypsum mortar, and wood, particularly for beams, was incorporated. Limestone, sourced from nearby rocky hills, was occasionally used in construction.

Qatari architecture is categorized into religious, civil, and military types. Religious architecture, mainly mosques, are typically unadorned, yet on rare occasions in urban areas, may feature intricate designs. Civil architecture includes palaces, houses, and marketplaces. Military architecture  consists of fortresses and defensive walls designed for protection, sometimes enclosing settlements. Coastal architecture shows Persian influences, while inland styles reflect Najdi traditions.
Traditional Qatari houses are centered around courtyards, which provide ventilation, sunlight, and private space for domestic activities. The houses are designed with the preservation of privacy in mind, and the layout of the houses segregates male visitors from family areas. The majlis, a formal reception area, holds particular importance in social contexts.
Several methods were used in traditional architecture to alleviate the country's harsh climate; for instance, windows were seldom used to reduce heat conduction. The badgheer construction method allowed air to be channeled into houses for ventilation. Air was also channeled by horizontal air gaps in rooms, and parapets and vertical openings in wind towers called hawaya which drew air into the courtyards. Such towers were historically present in coastal settlements such as Al Wakrah.

Folklore
Qatari folklore, known locally as hazzawi, was historically passed down orally between generations and is based mainly on maritime activities. One popular legend, or hikaya, is that of May and Ghilân. Originating from the Al Muhannadi tribe of Al Khor, the story narrates a struggle between two pearl fishers which results in the creation of the sail. Another locally popular tale is the Lord of the Sea, which revolves around a half-man half-fish monster named Bū Daryā who terrorizes sailors.
Among the notable folk heroes in Qatari folklore are individuals like Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a, a celebrated war poet from the 7th century, and Rahmah ibn Jabir Al Jalhami, an infamous pirate and ruler of Qatar in the 18th and 19th centuries. Recurring motifs in Qatari folklore include djinn, pearl diving, and the sea.

With the advent of oil exploration and modernization, the tradition of oral storytelling gradually declined. Efforts by government ministries such as the Ministry of Culture, alongside local universities, have been made to preserve and transcribe these tales. Collaborative endeavors between government agencies and regional bodies like the GCC States Folklore Centre, headquartered in Doha, have helped preserve the local folklore.

Literature
Qatari literature as a field began in the 19th century, initially featuring written poetry, mainly the nabati form. In the mid-20th century, spurred by oil revenues, short stories and novels emerged as popular literary forms. Poetry remained popular, but other literary genres became increasingly common as a result of a more educated population, and increasingly featured women writers.
Qatari literature is broadly categorized into two periods, divided primarily by increasing economic prosperity and globalization: pre-1950 and post-1950.
In the 1970s, the popularization of short stories and novels provided both the opportunity for female writers to involve themselves in the arts, as well as an avenue to discuss societal problems. Kaltham Jaber became the first Qatari female author to publish a collection of short stories, and to publish a major work when she released her anthology of short stories, dating from 1973 to the year of its publishing, 1978. Novels have become more popular in the 21st century; nearly a quarter of all existing Qatari-authored novels were published post-2014. Efforts to preserve and document Qatari literature have been undertaken through initiatives like the Qatar Digital Library and local publishing houses.

Poetry
Poetry has been an integral part of the culture since pre-Islamic times. Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a, a folk hero dating to the seventh century, was renowned for writing poetry. It was seen as a verbal art which fulfilled essential social functions. Having a renowned poet among its ranks was a source of pride for tribes; it was the primary way age-old traditions were passed down through generations. Poems composed by females primarily focused on the theme of ritha, to lament. This type of poetry served as an elegy.
Nabati was the primary form of oral poetry. In the nineteenth-century, Sheikh Jassim Al Thani composed influential Nabati poems on the political conditions in Qatar. Nabati poems are broadcast on radio and televised in the country.

Weaving and dyeing
Weaving and dyeing by women played a substantial role in Bedouin culture. Spinning sheep's and camel's wool to produce cloths was laborious. The wool was first disentangled and tied to a bobbin, serving as a core and keeping the fibers rigid. This was followed by spinning the wool by hand on a spindle known as noul. They were then placed on a vertical loom constructed from wood whereupon women would use a stick to beat the weft into place.
The resulting cloths were used in rugs, carpets, and tents. Tents were usually made up of naturally colored cloths, whereas rugs and carpets used dyed cloths; mainly red and yellow. The dyes were fashioned from desert herbs, with simple geometrical designs being employed. The art lost popularity in the 19th century as dyes and cloths were increasingly imported from other regions in Asia.

Embroidery
A simple form of embroidery practiced by Qatari women was known as kurar. It involved four women, each carrying four threads, who would braid the threads on articles of clothing - mainly thawbs or abayas. The braids, varying in color, were sewn vertically. It was similar to heavy chain stitch embroidery. Gold threads, known as zari, were commonly used. They were usually imported from India.
Another type of embroidery involved the designing of caps called gohfiahs. They were made from cotton and were pierced with thorns from palm trees to allow the women to sew between the holes. This form of embroidery declined in popularity after the country began importing the caps.
Khiyat al madrasa, translated as 'school embroidery', involved stitching furnishings by satin stitching. Prior to the stitching process, a skilled artist would draw a shape onto the fabric. The most common designs were birds and flowers.

Music
The folk music of Qatar is largely influenced by pearl fishing. Traditional dances, such as the ardah and tanbura, are performed during festive occasions such as weddings or feasts and are accompanied by percussion instruments like al-ras and mirwas. Other commonly used folk instruments include stringed instruments such as the oud and rebaba, and woodwind instruments like the ney and sirttai. Clapping also played a major part in most folk music.

Various forms of folk music are repurposed in modern Khaliji (Gulf) music. The Ministry of Culture has made efforts to preserve and document folk music, alongside efforts to form an active music scene with the establishment of music institutions like the Qatar Music Academy and the Qatar Philharmonic Orchestra.
Songs related to pearl fishing are the most popular genre of male folk music. Each song, varying in rhythm, narrates a different activity of the pearling trip, including spreading the sails, diving, and rowing the ships. Collective singing was an integral part of each pearling trip. Each ship had a designated singer, known locally as al naham. A specific type of sea music, known as fijiri, features group performances accompanied by melodic singing, rhythmic palm-tapping on water jars (known as galahs), and wave-like dance. Qatari women sang primarily about daily activities, such as wheat grinding and cooking, in groups. Public performances by women were practiced only on two annual occasions: al-moradah and al-ashori. Classical Qatari melodies share many similarities with their Gulf counterparts, and most of the same instruments are used.

Theatre
Theatre emerged in Qatar during the mid-20th century, with the establishment of the troupes of the Qatari Theatrical Troupe in 1972 and the Al Sadd Theatrical Troupe in 1973. The Doha Players, founded in 1954, stands as the oldest English-speaking amateur theatre club in Qatar. By 1986, efforts to support theatrical endeavors culminated in the formation of the first company aimed at aiding troupes and actors in producing plays. Venues include the Qatar National Theater, Katara Drama Theatre, and Al Rayyan Theatre.
While specific theatrical themes, such as polygamy, marriage, family issues, and political discord have been subject to societal taboos, they have also served as popular subjects for theatre. Plays like Ommul Zain (1975) by Abdulrahman Al-Mannai addressed generational conflicts arising from Qatar's rapid development, while others like Ibtisam in the Dock (1985) and Girls Market offer perspectives on arranged marriages and societal norms. Furthermore, geopolitical events, such as the blockade imposed on Qatar in 2017, spurred an increase in politically-themed plays.

Mass media
Al Jazeera, Qatar's largest television network, was founded in 1996 and has since become the foundation of the media sector. Initially launched as an Arabic news and current affairs satellite TV channel, Al Jazeera has since expanded into a network with several outlets, including the internet and specialty TV channels in multiple languages. The 'Al Jazeera effect' refers to the global impact of the Al Jazeera Media Network, particularly on the politics of the Arab world. beIN Sports, a global network of sports channels, was launched in 2012. It is an affiliate of Al Jazeera Media Network.
Qatar is home to seven newspapers, four in Arabic and three in English, along with nine magazines. Radio broadcasting began in June 1968, and currently offers services in English, Arabic, French, and Urdu through Qatar Radio. In a bid to enhance diversity, in 2020 the government granted licenses for private radio stations geared towards specific communities such as Malayalam and Hindi speakers.
Cinema in Qatar has developed rapidly in the 21st century, partially being developed as a means for Qatar to increase its soft power through the arts. Al-Mayassa bint Hamad Al Thani's founding of the Doha Film Institute (DFI) has provided support to local and regional filmmakers through grants, workshops, and festivals; for example, the Doha Tribeca Film Festival (DTFF) and Ajyal Film Festival.

Traditions
Pearling and fishing
As Qatar is a highly arid country, the traditional ways of life were confined either to nomadic pastoralism practiced by the Bedouins of the interior and to fishing and pearling engaged in by the settled coastal dwellers, called hadar, who formed the majority of the population. Both fishing and pearling were done mainly using dhows, and the latter activity occasionally employed enslaved people. While pearl trading was a lucrative venture for traders and dealers of pearls, the pearlers would receive scant profits. The central fishing and pearling centers of Qatar throughout its history have been Fuwayrit, Al Huwaila, and Al Bidda.
Pearling is an ancient practice in the Persian Gulf; with some historians stating the profession dates back to the Dilmun civilization in Bahrain 5,000 years ago, with which the inhabitants of Qatar came into contact at the time. The captain of a pearling craft is called nakhuda and is responsible for the most important tasks of a pearling trip, such as managing conflicts between the divers (al-fawwas) and the storage of pearls. The al-muqaddim is responsible for all ship operations while the al-sakuni is the ship's driver.

Historically, the season for pearl harvest was divided into three periods, with the primary pearl diving season, lasting from May to September. Sambuk, a type of dhow, was traditionally used for pearling trips. From the 18th to 20th centuries, most pearls were exported to Mumbai, where they would be sent to European markets, with the remaining yield being sent to markets in Baghdad. The importance of the pearl in Qatar is exemplified by a quote of Mohammed bin Thani, ruler of Qatar in the late 1800s, who in 1877 said "We are all from the highest to the lowest slaves of one master, Pearl." After the introduction of the cultured pearl and the Great Depression in the 20th century, pearling became a less economically viable profession.

Nomadic pastoralism
Despite only comprising about one-tenths of the Qatari population, Bedouin Qataris occupy a significant historical role in local culture. Bedouin lifestyle was nomadic and consisted of frequent migration after either a water source had been used up or a grazing site was exhausted. However, in Qatar, most Bedouins would only wander during the winter when the weather was suitable. Goats and camels were the main livelihoods of Bedouins, with products from the former being used in trade and for sustenance and camels being used as a means of transportation and a source of milk. Every tribe had its own region, called dirah in Arabic, but if the resources in their dirah had become depleted, the tribe would be forced to migrate to another tribe's dirah, potentially provoking conflicts.

It was unusual for a tribe to remain at one location for a period exceeding ten days. The average daily distance traveled by Bedouins was not very long to preserve energy and resources, only being hastened by inclement weather or far-away distances between pastures. Women were responsible for making clothing, child rearing, and preparing food. Conversely, men would hunt for game with hawks and dogs during the winter months.
Leaders of Bedouin tribes, known as sheikhs, were expected to provide charity to the poorer members of the tribe. The sheikh's wife was expected to help solve complaints brought to her by the female members of the tribe. Bedouins often lived very modestly, lacking a consistent source of income. Nonetheless, due to the cooperation and charity between tribe members, it was rare that one would go hungry except during exceptionally long droughts. After the discovery of oil in Qatar, most Qataris moved to urban areas, and the Bedouin way of life gradually disappeared. Only a few tribes in Qatar continue this lifestyle. These practices have declined due to urbanization, economic development, and the expansion of state infrastructure. Today, such traditions are often preserved symbolically as part of cultural heritage rather than functioning as primary economic activities.

Tents
Tents (khaïmas) were the primary dwellings of Bedouins and are still used in the desert. In northern Qatar, the tents were mainly uniform, with all sides of the tent being enclosed for privacy. The tent's interior comprised distinct sections, delineated by woven walls or carpets, which could be compressed to create a single space. The sections included quarters for unmarried adult men, designated guest areas, and spaces for children and young animals. Furnishings were modest, typically consisting of beddings, seating mats, and essential utensils. Typically, the central hearth served as the main gathering area for both family members and guests.
Women predominantly managed domestic affairs within the tent, including cooking, dairy processing, and crafts such as weaving and sewing. Certain livestock animals were permitted in the tent, though dogs were excluded in most instances. Camps in southern Qatar typically comprised two to seven tents and were constructed with seasonal migration in mind, though were similar in appearance to those in the north.

Livestock rearing
Bedouins have traditionally been reliant on the rearing and grazing of livestock. In the north, despite the tribes leading more sedentary lives, animals such as camels, sheep, goats, cows and donkeys were commonly found. Poultry, and occasionally pigeons, were also present. Salukis were sometimes kept to hunt game. Camps consisted of 2 to 6 tents, with livestock influencing their size and arrangements; a typical tent looking after 30 to 40 animals. Livestock care, primarily the responsibility of men, included tasks such as marking, castration, and slaughtering. Women managed milking and dairy production. Camels were less prominent in the north, primarily housed by select families.
Compared to their northern counterparts, Bedouins in southern Qatar relied more on camels; for instance, the Al Murrah tribe, which is dedicated almost exclusively to camel husbandry. While some groups kept sheep and goats for supplementary purposes, camels remained the most popular livestock.

Camels
Camels are regarded with high importance among Qatar's Bedouin tribes, having historically served as a means of transportation, as well as sources of milk, meat, and various materials. Men primarily oversee breeding and tasks like mating, castration, and branding for ownership identification. Women and children historically participated in loading and riding camels, particularly during migration periods.

Hunting and scavenging
Hunting is a prominent Bedouin tradition. While wild game was once abundant in Qatar, it had become scarce by the 20th century, with historical accounts recalling hunting with flintlock guns; however, due to the scarcity in game, it had mostly become a marginal activity. However, it remained relatively popular in southern Qatar, where Bedouins were equipped with shotguns, rifles, and falcons, particularly  wakris. Hunting hounds, known as salukis, were also occasionally used for hunting to a lesser extent.

Collection of natural resources, particularly during the truffle season in early spring, was another popular activity. Locusts, traditionally valued as food, were gathered during invasions, and natural resources like sea salt were collected from coastal cliffs. Firewood and shrubs were gathered for fuel prior to the advent of paraffin stoves. The salvaging of flotsam was also popular. Additionally, discarded materials from the oil industry and urban areas were systematically collected.

Social life
Cuisine
Qatari cuisine reflects traditional Arab and Levantine cuisine, with heavy influences by Iranian and Indian cuisine. Seafood and dates are staple food items. As Qatar follows Shariah religious law, alcohol, and pork products cannot be brought into the country; however, alcohol is available for purchase for eligible non-Muslims. Traditional meals are usually served with guests seated on the floor, partaking of the food with their hands.
Before the meal commences, it is customary to serve Arabic coffee brewed in brass coffee pots infused with cardamom. Served in small porcelain cups, guests signal by gently shaking the cup when they have had their fill. Hot tea, typically flavored with mint and sweetened with sugar, may also be served in small glass mugs.
The national dish of Qatar is machbous (also known as kabsa), which consists of rice cooked with Arabic spices and served mainly with lamb, but also with chicken or fish. Other important dishes include mathruba, which is rice beaten with cardamom, milk, butter, and any choice of meat, until it turns into porridge form; thareed, consists of bread soaked in vegetable, spices, and chicken/lamb stew; harees, which is meat beaten with boiled ground wheat, until it turns into porridge form; and balaleet, a sweet and savory dish usually eaten for breakfast or as a dessert, which includes vermicelli cooked with sugar, rose water, cardamom, and saffron, and topped with omelet eggs.

Dress
Clothing laws punish and forbid wearing revealing or indecent clothes. A government body enforces the dressing-code law called "Al-Adheed". In 2012, a Qatari NGO organized a campaign of "public decency" after they deemed the government to be too lax in monitoring the wearing of revealing clothes, defining the latter as "not covering shoulders and knees, tight or transparent clothes". The campaign targets foreigners who constitute the majority of Qatar's population.

Qatari men wear thawbs (a long white shirt) over loose pants. Aside from protecting the wearer against the dangers of the sun, it also serves as a symbol of affiliation. In previous decades, different types of thawbs were used depending on the occasion, though this is seldom the case in present-day. They also wear a loose headdress, a ghutra, which comes in white or red. Around the ghutra is a black rope called agal, which holds it in place.
Qatari women generally wear customary dresses that include the black colored body covering known as the abaya together with the black scarf used for covering their heads known as the shayla. A burqa is sometimes worn to conceal their face. It is thought that Qatari women began using face masks in the 19th century amid substantial immigration. As they had no practical ways of concealing their faces from foreigners, they began wearing the same face mask as their Persian counterparts. Young girls wear a bukhnoq, an embroidered cloth covering the hair and the upper section of the body, prior to the age of marriage.

Social welfare
Qatar has been described as a rentier state that has allocated a significant portion of its wealth from hydrocarbon exports towards the social welfare of its citizens, in a sense, "buying their loyalty". The ruling House of Thani uses such policies  to maintain their legitimacy.
In the state's early years, wealth distribution was often unequal, benefiting primarily members of the ruling family and those with governmental positions. The country's infrastructure and social services developed at a relatively slow pace, with the share of oil wealth being split between basic needs like electricity, water, healthcare, and education, and the ruler's personal treasury. However, protests during the reign of Ahmad bin Ali Al Thani (1960–1972) led to a more equitable distribution of oil revenues, known as the "quarter rule". His successor, Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, furthered this trend by increasing social welfare, housing benefits, and salary increments.
In addition to providing essential services like healthcare and education free of charge to citizens, there are no taxes and several state benefits, including land grants, interest-free loans, scholarships for students studying abroad, and guaranteed civil service jobs. As a result of these benefits, some political analysts have described Qatari citizens as "too rich to care" about disrupting the political system or questioning the legitimacy of its ruler. Benefits and privileges afforded can vary depending on the social standing of a family.

Ethnic groups
The Qatari population reflects its status as a pearling hub and a rangeland for nomadic Arab tribes, with distinct separations between the Bedouins, comprising approximately 10% of Qatar's native population, and the hadar, settled urban dwellers. Ethnic differences are rarely acknowledged or discussed in formal contexts.
Bedouins mainly consist of nomadic tribes which migrated from Najd and Al-Hasa in the 18th century, with some retaining Saudi or other Gulf states' citizenship. Comprising approximately 10% of Qataris, many are employed in the oil industry, police, army, and security services. The government launched initiatives to settle Bedouin families in the 1960s. Some Bedouins consider themselves as "pure" Arabs in contrast to the settled population (hadar), which they perceive as being influenced by urban and Persian elements.
The hadar is a term used to encompass settled Qataris, including Baharna, Huwala, Ajam (Iranians), and Afro-Arabs. The Baharna, an Arab group native to Eastern Arabia and mostly Shia Muslim, sometimes face discrimination from the Sunni majority. Huwala Arabs are Sunni Muslims who migrated through the Persian Gulf to Persia and back to Qatar, and have historically been wealthier and better-educated due to profits from pearl trading. The Ajam are ethnic Shia Persians who were historically active in boat building and still speak Persian. The country's Afro-Arab population descends from slaves brought from East Africa for the pearling industry. While some Arabs may view this group as "less" Qatari, most consider them full citizens. Intermarriage has increased over time, and Persian and African influences are evident in local culture.

Foreigners
Foreigners constitute 85% to 90% of Qatar's population of 2.7 million, with migrant workers making up approximately 95% of the workforce. Most migrants originate from South Asia and Southeast Asia. There exists a degree of societal divisions based on nationality, with Europeans, North Americans, and Arabs typically securing better job opportunities and social privileges than sub-Saharan Africans and South Asians. Barriers such as language and cultural differences limit the social opportunities between Qataris and foreigners.
The human rights of migrant workers is limited by the country's Kafala system, which stipulates a Qatari sponsor and restricts their entry and exit. Migrant workers are often exploited by paying recruitment fees which surpass government-set limits, ranging from $600 to $5,000 and frequently placing workers into debt. Furthermore, some Qatari companies violate local labor laws, and some have been implicated in non-payment of or delay in wages, as well as incomplete pay slips which hinders remittances. Many employers also confiscate their employees' passports, which restricts their freedom of movement.

Cultural diversity
Qatar has a highly diverse population, with expatriates making up a significant majority of residents. This demographic structure has had a major impact on cultural life, shaping everyday social interactions, labor systems, and cultural practices. Migrant communities contribute to the circulation of languages, cuisines, and cultural traditions, making Qatari society more heterogeneous than traditional representations suggest.
At the same time, cultural expression in Qatar is influenced by state policies that seek to preserve national identity while managing rapid economic and social change. As a result, contemporary culture reflects both long-standing traditions and the effects of globalization, urbanization, and migration.

Language
Arabic is the official language of Qatar according to Article 1 of the Constitution. Arabic in Qatar is the medium of official communication, legislation, and education. The government has instituted policies to reinforce the use of Arabic, including the Arabic Language Protection Law enacted in 2019, which mandates the use of Arabic in governmental and public functions and penalizes non-compliance. Arabic speakers constitute a minority of the 2.8 million population, at around 11%.
Qatari Arabic, a dialect of Gulf Arabic, is the primary dialect spoken and the country's prestige dialect. The vocabulary of Qatari Arabic incorporates many loanwords from Aramaic, Persian, Turkish, and more recently, English. Phonetically, it conserves many classical Arabic features such as emphatic consonants and interdental sounds, in contrast to other Arabic dialects which simplified these elements. Due to the status of English as the prestige lingua franca in Qatar, some speakers of Qatari Arabic have incorporated English elements into their everyday speech, colloquially known as Qatarese. The practice of interchanging English and Arabic words is known as code-switching and is mostly seen in urban areas and among the younger generation.
English is the de facto second language of Qatar, and is very commonly used in business. Because of Qatar's multiethnic population, English has been recognized as the most convenient medium for people of different backgrounds to communicate with each other. The most common Asian languages among Qatar's migrants are Hindi, Urdu, Tagalog, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam. Hindi and Malayalam are particularly prevalent, with large communities of speakers from India.

Religion
The state religion in Qatar is Islam. Most Qataris belong to the Sunni sect of Islam. Shiites comprise around 10% of Qatar's Muslim population. Religious policy is set by the Ministry of Islamic Affairs. Islamic instruction is compulsory for Muslims in all state-sponsored schools. According to tradition, the inhabitants of Qatar converted to Islam in 628. Prior to this, Qatar was part of a region with a largely Christian presence known as Beth Qaṭraye.
The community is made up of Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, Christians, Hindus, and small groups of Buddhists and Baha’is. Muslims form 65.5% of the Qatari population, followed by Christians at 15.4%, Hindus at 14.2%, Buddhists at 3.3% and the rest 1.9% of the population follow other religions or are unaffiliated. Qatar is also home to numerous other religions mainly from the Middle East and Asia.
At the end of 2013, there were a total of 1,848 mosques recorded in the country. The country's state mosque is Imam Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Mosque, which was named in honor of the Salafi Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab of the Najd. Other important mosques are the Katara Mosque, the Education City Mosque, and the Fanar, Qatar Islamic Cultural Center.

Customs and beliefs
Al-Majlis
The majlis is ubiquitous in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf and serves as a place where friends and neighbors discuss matters of mutual interest, customarily over cups of Arabic coffee. Historically, the dour, or spacious rooms designated for these gatherings, hosted seafarers between pearl fishing seasons, where they engaged in al-samra, evenings of song and dance, during weddings and other occasions for entertainment.
The majlis also historically served as a means of communal discussion and conflict resolution, prioritizing the authority of elder members. The majlis also imparts moral and cultural values to its younger audience.
On 4 December 2015, the majlis was inscribed on UNESCO's List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in a joint filing by Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Qatar.

Arabic coffee and dates
As the national fruit of Qatar, dates have both cultural and culinary importance, particularly during Ramadan, when they are consumed to break fast. They are also considered a symbol of hospitality, along with Arabic  coffee. Qatar's history in date cultivation is thought to date back thousands of years, and is represented in the Qatari national emblem, which features two date palms alongside a traditional dhow. They are celebrated annually during festivals, such as the annual Local Dates Festival held in Souq Waqif.
Arabic coffee (gahwa) is among the most popular beverages in Qatar and is served in a coffee pot known as a dallah. The preparation of Arabic coffee typically involves the use of high-quality green coffee beans, saffron, cardamom, cloves, and other traditional ingredients, and are sometimes ground by hand.

Oud and bukhoor
Oud, originating from a resin extracted from the agar (Aquilaria) tree, is commonly used in Qatari households and on ceremonial occasions. Incense, known locally as bukhoor, is also frequently used. Made from fragrant woods, it is ignited within a specialized vessel called a mabkhara, emitting smoke that fills the home and imbues clothing with its fragrance. Moreover, as a gesture of hospitality, guests are often encouraged to participate in the tradition of enveloping themselves in the smoke.

Folk beliefs
Many of Qatar's folk beliefs are based on religion, with some beliefs aimed at invoking divine protection or warding off harm. For instance, the breaking of an object was interpreted as the removal of evil, while the call to prayer occurring ahead of schedule prompted concerns of impending danger. A popular folk belief states that it is inadvisable to pass in front of someone who is praying, as this may sever their divine connection.
Several superstitions exist in local culture, most with the aim of avoiding perceived dangers. For example, funeral prayers were often recited for individuals believed to harbor envy, accompanied by discreetly sprinkling salt behind one's backs for protection. One superstition warned that open scissors could cause conflict between family members, while another warned that sleeping on one's back would cause nightmares due to the shaitan's (devil) presence during sleep.
Cautionary tales included those that warn against gazing directly at lightning to prevent blindness, as well as avoiding displaying the bottom soles of shoes, as it was perceived as disrespectful to Allah. Other taboos included sweeping floors at night, as this would disturb potential djinn residing in homes, and biting one's tongue during meals, as this was interpreted as  sign of impending bad luck. Some folk beliefs were health-related, resulting in traditional remedies such as consuming specific foods like senna blends or crab meat and shrimp soup, which were thought to cure various ailments.

Holidays and ceremonies
Qatar's weekends are Friday and Saturday. In 2009, Cabinet Decision No. 33 was passed by the Emir, decreeing the first Sunday in March as an official holiday for all financial institutions in Qatar.

Ramadan
Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic calendar, is characterized by the obligatory observation of fasting (sawm), wherein adherents abstain from consuming food and beverages from dawn until dusk. In Qatar, the beginning of Ramadan is determined by the Moon Sighting Committee, within the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs, which observes the crescent moon, signaling both the conclusion of Ramadan and the onset of Eid al-Fitr, the festival of breaking the fast.
Prior to fasting, Qataris observe the Sha'ban, the month prior to Ramadan, with Al-Nafla festivities. During these festivities, families share traditional meals such as harees and tharid with neighbors and the less fortunate.
The daily fast begins at sunrise following the consumption of suhur, a meal intended to keep individuals nourished throughout the day. In the past, al-musaharati roamed the farjan (neighborhoods) during Ramadan, beating his drum and reciting poetry to wake people up for suhur. Iftar, the meal marking the fast's conclusion at sunset, typically begins with the consumption of dates. This is accompanied by the firing of a Ramadan cannon, a tradition which is broadcast live on national television and can be observed at locations such as Souq Waqif, Katara Cultural Village and Imam Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Mosque.
Al Ghabqa, a feast that takes place at night during Ramadan following iftar and tarawih prayers, features various dishes such as grilled and fried fish, rice cooked with date extract, and tharid. It also typically offers an assortment of sweets such as luqaimat and asida, alongside dates, tea, and Arabic coffee.

Garangao
Garangao is celebrated on the 15th night of Ramadan. The name derives from the Arabic word garqaa, denoting a rattling or shaking motion. It is celebrated throughout the Middle East, with slight variations. On Garangao night, children wear colorful attire and visit homes, singing traditional songs and receiving sweets and gifts from residents. In contemporary times, Garangao is celebrated on a larger scale, with events taking place in shopping malls, mosques, and cultural organizations.

Eid
The two Eid holidays, celebrated by all Muslims, are Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha.

Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Fitr, translating to the "festivity of breaking the fast", takes place on the first day of the tenth month. Designated a nationwide holiday in Qatar, educational institutions, offices, and commercial establishments are closed during this period. Many related events take place at shopping centers and public arenas. Applying henna is customary for Qatari women during Eid al-Fitr. The inaugural Eid Al-Fitr Festival, organized by Qatar Tourism, was launched on 4 May 2022 and lasted for three days. Celebrations were held on the Doha Corniche featuring musical performances; it was estimated that about 10,000 to 15,000 spectators attended each day.

Eid al-Adha
Eid al-Adha, known as the "celebration of sacrifice", occurs during the conclusion of Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca. This event is observed on the tenth day of Dhu'l-Hijja (12th month), where families meet for prayers and feasts. Traditionally, donating meat to the less privileged is practiced during this day.
Throughout Eid festivities, children in Qatar travel door-to-door singing folk songs and phrases to receive their eidiyah, a customary monetary gift. Eid greetings like "Eid Mubarak" and "Eid Saeed" convey blessings and joy, while "Kul 'am wa enta bi-khair" conveys wishes for good health and prosperity.

Qatar National Day
Qatar National Day is an annual celebration of the date that Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani succeeded his father Mohammed bin Thani as ruler of Qatar, uniting its tribes and earning the country additional autonomy. In 2008, the date of the Qatar National Day was changed from 3 September to 18 December, to reflect the exact date of succession.  
Various activities and events mark the day. The largest of these events is the Qatar National Day Parade, which takes place along the Doha Corniche and includes the showcasing of military equipment, folk music and firework shows. Events also take place at Souq Waqif and Katara Cultural Village.
In the days preceding Qatar National Day, the Darb Al Saai festival, organized by Qatar's Ministry of Culture, is held in Umm Salal Mohammed. Activities include the ceremonial flag-raising, military performances, and local musicians' live performances of sea music. The event also features exhibitions and workshops on traditional crafts and folklore.

National Sports Day
Qatar's National Sports Day has been celebrated annually on the second Tuesday of February as a recognized holiday since its inaugural edition in 2012. It features activities promoting fitness and well-being.
Various events take place at venues such as Education City, Aspire Park, and the Doha Corniche. In collaboration with the Qatar Olympic Committee and the Ministry of Sports and Youth, these events feature activities such as races, yoga, golf, team sports, and educational workshops, complemented by appearances from sports personalities.

Weddings
Historically in Qatar, invitations to the wedding were sent out in urban areas but not used among Bedouin tribes due to weddings being an intrinsically public affair. The khella, the room where the bride and groom spend their first night, undergo extensive preparation. They are furnished and decorated luxuriously, with the lower class families borrowing from relatives and friends, and the upperclass families being able to afford luxuries such as mirrors and scarce fabrics.
Prior to a marriage, it was customary for women to undergo elaborate embellishment rituals, particularly the application of henna. Traditionally, women within the family undertook the task of henna preparation and application, using natural ingredients. In modern-day, many women visit professional henna artists and specialized salons which offer intricate designs and tattoo patterns. On occasion, semi-public ceremonies are held during the henna application.

Sports and recreation
Football is the most popular sport in regards to registered player base. Additionally, athletics, basketball, handball, volleyball, camel racing, horse racing, falconry, cricket and swimming are widely practiced. There are currently 11 multi-sports clubs in the country, and 7 single-sports clubs. Qatar hosted the AFC Asian Cup in 1988, 2011 and 2023. They won the competition for the first time in the 2019 edition, after defeating Japan 3–1 in the final. Qatar would successfully retain their title on home soil, following a 3–1 victory against Jordan in the 2023 final held in Lusail. Qatar hosted the 2022 FIFA World Cup and is the first Arab nation to have done so.
Aside from football, handball and basketball are the next two popular team sports. Handball was introduced to the country in 1968; however, Qatar did not join the International Handball Federation until the 1970s. The Qatar men's national handball team qualified for the IHF World Men's Handball Championship on four occasions, and automatically qualified for a fifth as host. Qatar came runners-up to France in the 2015 World Handball Championship held on home soil, however the tournament was marred by various controversies. Qatar has won the Asian Men's Handball Championship title four times in a row in 2014, 2016, 2018 and 2020.
In April 2023, FIBA announced that Qatar will host the upcoming 2027 FIBA Basketball World Cup. This will make Qatar the first in the Arab world to host the FIBA Basketball World Cup and the second Muslim country to host after the 2010 edition in Turkey. The 2027 FIBA Basketball World Cup will be the 20th tournament of the FIBA Basketball World Cup for men's national basketball teams.
The tradition of hunting for game in the desert uses mainly falcons. However, saluki dogs are also used for hunting in the desert, primarily because of their great speeds. Their main prey in the desert are gazelles and rabbits.

Falconry
Falconry has been a popular cultural practice in Qatar for centuries. On average, a falcon can go for anywhere from $4,000 to $10,000; a price of $250,000 was even recorded at an auction in 2022. Due to the high prices of hunting falcons, it is mainly practiced by upper-class citizens able to afford the investment. The only falconry association is Al Gannas, which was founded in 2008 in the Katara Cultural Village and which hosts the Annual Falconry Festival, also known as S'hail. Hunting season extends from October to April.
Falconers are often required to be well-versed in matters such avian anatomy and behavior, as the selection of an efficient hunting falcon is dependent on several physical factors which are not immediately apparent to the layperson, such as feathers and coloration. Furthermore, falconers typically require adequate transportation means to traverse the desert, as they typically travel great distances in search of game, with the plains of Saudi Arabia, Sudan and Pakistan being popular destinations. The most popular local venue for falconry is the Falcon Souq at Souq Waqif in Doha. Among the activities that take place here are auctions for expensive birds, the process of taming, and veterinary care for falcons, which is usually provided at the Souq Waqif Falcon Hospital.

Camel racing
Camel racing is a historically important sport in the country, and is considered a tradition among Qatar's Bedouin tribes, occurring during special occasions such as weddings. The Qatari government has invested heavily in the sport through initiatives implemented by the Camel Racing Organizing Committee (Hejan), such as inaugurating the Al-Shahaniya Arena in 1990, which has modern facilities such as illuminated tracks for nighttime races. The committee has also implemented modern registration systems, such as electronic services for camel owners.

As a competitive sport, camel racing dates back to 1973 when the first camel race was organized in Al-Farra, an area located 9 km west of Al-Shahaniya, featuring 300 camels. Subsequently, new racetracks were inaugurated, such as Al Rayyan Square and Libraqa Square, which hosted races until the late 1980s; these tracks were eventually replaced by the Al-Shahaniya Camel Racetrack in 1990. The two main camel types used for racing in Qatar are Omani camels, known for their robust build and endurance, and the Sudanese camels, known for their speed. Typically, camel racing season takes place from September to March. Approximately 22,000 racing camels are used in competitions which are mainly held at the Al-Shahaniya Camel Racetrack and attended by thousands of spectators. The average distance of such races is usually 4 to 8 km, depending on several factors. The races typically feature large monetary awards for winners, including cars appraised at values upwards of $200,000.
Over the years, the Qatari government organized additional camel racing competitions such as the Grand Annual Festival to showcase camels from Qatar and neighboring Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. The government has also sponsored efforts to technologically advance the sport as a whole, such as introducing robot jockeys in 2005. These initiatives, as well as increased state regulation, are part of the efforts to modernize camel racing while preserving its cultural significance.

Folk games
Prior to the introduction of football, children played traditional games, including al dahroi, al sabbah, and taq taq taqiyyah for boys, and al kunatb, al laqfah and nat al habl for girls. Two of the most popular board games were a’ailah and al haluwsah. Damah, a variant of checkers, has had a resurgence in popularity in recent years.

Depending on the location, a game could be a sea game or an urban game; furthermore, most games were gender exclusive. Typically, boys' games would be more physical. One such game was called tnumba, in which two teams would attempt to redirect an airborne ball toward the others' hand-dug pit, which served as a goal. Another similar game was called matoua and involved taking turns using a makeshift tennis racket to keep a ball suspended in the air, the winner being who can keep it in the air for the longest time. Farrarah was the name used for a gyroscope, which boys would often compete with each other over the length of time they could keep it spinning for. All of these are categorized as urban games. An example of a sea game, which was less common, was releasing hand-made miniature boats into the water and racing them to a prespecified landmark.
Shakaha was a popular girls' game. It involved two girls prone on the ground, oriented towards each other, with a third girl attempting to pass by jumping over them. As the game progressed, the girls on the ground would become increasingly outstretched, making it more difficult for the third girl to pass. One game shared by both boys and girls was called zlalwah, and involved the person whose turn it is throwing a stone at the shadow of one of the participants, with the game ending once the targeted person chases and catches one of the others.

See also

Ministry of Culture and Sports (Qatar)


== References ==

## Cuisine of Qatar
Qatari cuisine is made up of traditional Arab cuisine. Machbūs, a meal consisting of rice, meat, and vegetables, is the national dish in Qatar, typically made with either lamb or chicken and slow-cooked to give it a depth of flavour. Seafood and dates are staple food items in the country. Many of these dishes are also used in other countries in the region, as they share many commonalities. In other parts of the region, some of the dishes have different names or use slightly different ingredients.

Culinary traditions
Being invited to dine in a Qatari home is considered a special honor, reflecting the cultural value placed on hospitality. One notable aspect of Arab society is the generosity of the host, who typically prepares food in quantities much larger than necessary, ensuring that guests are abundantly provided for. To run out of food would be seen as a significant failure on the part of the host. Traditional meals are usually served with guests seated on the floor, communally partaking of the food with their hands.
Before the meal commences, it is customary to serve coffee or tea, with the most common being Arabic coffee, brewed in brass coffee pots infused with cardamom. Served in small porcelain cups, guests often consume three to five cups, signaling their satisfaction by gently shaking the cup when they have had their fill. Hot tea, typically flavored with mint and sweetened with sugar, may also be served in small glass mugs. Coffee and tea are commonly offered in both social and business meetings.
Restaurants traditionally serving Qatari and Arabic food are called matbakhs (kitchen). Such restaurants can be found almost all over Qatar, with notable concentrations being in Souq Waqif, The Pearl-Qatar and the Doha Corniche area.

Dates and date syrup
Dates (kholas) hold significant cultural and culinary importance as the national fruit of Qatar. Dates are widely cultivated in Qatar, with production exceeding 30,000 tonnes annually as of 2022, resulting in an 88% self-sufficiency in dates. This cultivation tradition dates back thousands of years in the region, and the Qatari national emblem features two date palms, alongside a traditional dhow. Dates also play an important role in Islamic tradition, particularly during Ramadan.
They are celebrated annually during the local dates festival. The annual Local Dates Festival held in Souq Waqif provides a platform for local farmers to showcase their harvests and date-based products, contributing to the promotion of local agriculture. They are commonly offered as a symbol of hospitality in traditional Qatari gatherings, alongside Arabic coffee. Several varieties of dates exist, among which the most popular in Qatar are khalas and shaishi.
The manufacturing of date syrup is one of the oldest industries in Qatar, dating back to at least the 17th century. The syrup was obtained by using a traditional date press called madabis or madbasa. Due to its high-calorie content and nutrient density, it was a cheap and quick source of energy for the locals, particularly pearl divers. With a short harvesting season for dates, the production of date syrup allowed for their preservation and prolonged consumption. This syrup served both civil and commercial purposes, being traded as a commodity and providing sustenance during periods of tribal conflicts and unrest. While modernization and lifestyle changes initially led to a decline in date syrup consumption, recent trends toward health-conscious alternatives have sparked renewed interest in this traditional sweetener.

Ramadan culinary traditions
Preceding the commencement of fasting during Ramadan, Qataris engage in preparatory rituals and communal gatherings, exemplified by the observance of Sha'ban, the month prior to Ramadan, with Al-Nafla festivities. During Al-Nafla, families share traditional meals such as harees and tharid—a meal combining crumbled bread, meat, and broth— with neighbors and the less fortunate.
Al Ghabqa is a feast that takes place at night during Ramadan following iftar and tarawih prayers, traditionally shared between immediate family members. The feast features a variety of dishes, notably grilled and fried fish, rice cooked with date extract, and tharid. The feast also includes an assortment of sweets such as luqaimat and asida, alongside dates, tea, and Arabic coffee.
Since the 20th century, street food, particularly street kebabs, has been especially popular during Ramadan.

Ingredients
Qatari cuisine predominantly revolves around staples like meat, fish, and rice infused with spices including cumin, coriander, cinnamon, and saffron. The incorporation of fresh ingredients such as herbs, vegetables, and fruits, whether locally sourced from regional markets or imported, is ubiquitous. Qataris often enhance popular traditional dishes by adding bread loaves or additional spices.
Ingredients for traditional dishes can be purchased in local souqs (markets) such as Souq Waqif, which includes a spice souq.

Qatari spice blends
Spices play an important role in many dishes in Arabic cooking. Cooks make sure to purchase the best-quality spices and avoid overbuying to preserve their freshness.

Bizar
Bizar is a combination of black pepper, coriander seeds, cinnamon sticks, clove, dried ginger, whole cardamom, dried red chili, and turmeric sticks. The spices are first washed, and then sun-dried, after which they are ground and mixed.

Daqoos blend
This is a red chili blend that includes roasted and crushed wheat, roasted and crushed cumin seeds, roasted and crushed sesame seeds, coriander seeds, crushed and dry red chili, garlic cloves, and finally salt.

Hisso
This blend of spices includes dried ginger, cinnamon sticks, cardamom seeds, whole black pepper, turmeric sticks, and cumin seeds.

Main dishes
Qatari machbous
Machbous is the national dish of Qatar and consists of rice, meat, onions, and tomatoes mixed with spices, traditionally the bizar spice mix. Garlic, ginger, parsley and hot peppers may also be added. This dish is the local variation of kabsa. It is similar to biryani or pulao.

Ghuzi
Ghuzi is a whole roast lamb served over nutty rice. It is also called shuwaa.

Madrouba
Madrouba is a spicy and comforting Qatari porridge made with chicken, overcooked rice, and a plethora of flavorings such as turmeric, cumin, cardamom, ginger, cloves, cinnamon, garlic, and black pepper. It is recommended to serve madrouba while it is still piping hot, preferably garnished with fresh lime zest.

Harees
Harees is a dish made from grinding wheat seeds and mixing it with fat (ghee). Salt and water are added, and it can be prepared with chicken or meat.

Jareesh
Jareesh is a chopped chicken dish consisting of ghee, wheat and onions, and topped with onions and green peppers.

Khobes rgag
Khobes rgag is a thin flatbread that is made of flour, water and salt, and is also used in other dishes like thareed.

Thareed
Thareed is a mixture of khobes rgag and broth, vegetables, and either chicken or meat.

Saloona
Saloona is made of any broth, with the meat and vegetables of the cook's choice, and spices.

Desserts
Luqaimat
Luqaimat is a dessert made of leavened and deep-fried dough balls. The ingredients used to create this sweet pastry are flour, milk, butter, sugar, saffron and cardamom. After it is fried and ready to be served, honey or a sweet syrup is poured on top of it.

Khabees
Khabees are seedless dates soaked in water, combined with roasted flour and mixed with sugar, oil, butter, saffron, cardamom and rose water.

Asida
Asida is a sweet dish made with flour, oil and sugar.

Balaleet
Balaleet are noodles cooked with sugar, cinnamon, saffron and cardamom. There is often an omelette on top.

Sago
Sago is a Qatari sweet gelatin pudding spiced with saffron and cardamom. It can be found in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates as well.

Umm Ali
Umm Ali is a bread and rice pudding. This dish originates in Egypt, and the Qatari version is said to deviate from it slightly.

Al-Qars Al-Uqaili
Al-Qars Al-Uqaili is a popular dessert in Qatari cuisine. Known for its delicate texture, it is made from a thin dough that is cooked until it reaches a golden brown hue. The dough is then sliced into circular pieces.

Drinks
Arabic coffee
Traditionally paired with dates, coffee is deeply entrenched in Qatari culture, reflects centuries of tradition and globalization. Originating from either Ethiopia or Yemen and later popularized in the Arab world, Arabic coffee, or gahwa, is among the most popular beverages in Qatar. The preparation and consumption of Arabic coffee are steeped in rituals, with the brewing process and serving customs passed down through generations. In Qatari households, the making of Arabic coffee is considered a serious affair, often involving the use of high-quality green coffee beans, saffron, cardamom, cloves, and other traditional ingredients. These ingredients are carefully selected and sometimes ground by hand, reflecting the meticulous attention to detail in crafting the perfect cup of gahwa.
In modern Qatari society, the tradition of Arabic coffee remains vibrant, with majlises serving as contemporary hubs for socializing and discussion, reminiscent of historical coffeehouses. While traditional Arabic coffee remains paramount in Qatari culture, younger generations have embraced a diverse coffee culture, leading to the proliferation of specialty coffee shops in Doha which offer a range of brews and blends.

Karak
Karak, also known as "tea with milk" or "chai milk", is a bright orange mixture with cardamom, saffron, and sugar. Consisting of tea simmered with a mixture of spices along with evaporated milk, karak, while being popular, is not as widespread among the locals as gahwa (Arabic coffee).

References
External links
https://www.marhaba.qa/souq-waqif-essential-common-spices-arab-cooking/
https://www.willflyforfood.net/qatar-machboos-a-delight-that-will-make-you-crave-for-more/
https://www.tasteatlas.com/madrouba

## List of museums in Qatar
This is a list of museums in Qatar.

Museums in Qatar
National Museum of Qatar
3-2-1 Qatar Olympic and Sports Museum
Fire Station, Doha
Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art
Museum of Illusions Doha
Museum of Islamic Art, Doha
Msheireb Museums
OliOli Children's Museum
Sheikh Faisal Bin Qassim Al Thani Museum
Weaponry Museum
Al Thuraya Planetarium
QM Museum Gallery Katara
Al Riwaq Museum Gallery
Lawh Wa Qalam

Proposed museums
Lusail Museum
Art Mill Museum
Dadu Children's Museum
Qatar Auto Museum

See also
Qatar Museums
List of museums

References
External links
Official website