--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Ukraine
FILE_NAME: country_ukraine.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:51:30
----------------

# Ukraine

## General Overview
Ukraine is a country in Eastern Europe. It is the second-largest country in Europe after Russia, which borders it to the east and northeast. Ukraine also borders Belarus to the north; Poland and Slovakia to the west; Hungary, Romania and Moldova to the southwest; and the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov to the south and southeast. Kyiv is Ukraine's capital and largest city, followed by Kharkiv, Odesa, and Dnipro. The official language of the country is Ukrainian. Ukraine covers an area of 603,628 km2 (233,062 sq mi) with an estimated total population of 32.3 million in 2026.
Humans have inhabited Ukraine since 32,000 BC. During the Middle Ages, it was the site of early Slavic expansion and later became a key centre of East Slavic culture under the state of Kievan Rus', which emerged in the 9th century. Kievan Rus' became the largest and most powerful realm in Europe in the 10th and 11th centuries, but gradually disintegrated into rival regional powers before being destroyed by the Mongols in the 13th century. For the next 600 years the area was contested, divided, and ruled by a variety of external powers, including the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the Kingdom of Poland, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Austrian Empire, the Ottoman Empire, and the Tsardom of Russia.
The Cossack Hetmanate emerged in central Ukraine in the 17th century but was partitioned between Russia and Poland before being gradually absorbed by the Russian Empire in the 18th century. Ukrainian nationalism developed and, following the Russian Revolution in 1917, the short-lived Ukrainian People's Republic was formed. The Bolsheviks consolidated control over much of the former empire and established the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which became a constituent republic of the Soviet Union in 1922. In the early 1930s, millions of Ukrainians died in the Holodomor, a human-made famine. During World War II, Ukraine was occupied by Germany and endured major battles and atrocities, resulting in 7 million civilians killed, including most Ukrainian Jews.
Ukraine gained independence in 1991 as the Soviet Union dissolved, declaring itself neutral. A new constitution was adopted in 1996 as the country transitioned to a free market liberal democracy amid endemic corruption and a legacy of state control. The Orange Revolution of 2004–2005 ushered electoral and constitutional reforms. Resurgent political crises prompted a series of mass demonstrations in 2014 known as the Euromaidan, leading to a revolution, at the end of which Russia unilaterally occupied and annexed Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula, and pro-Russian unrest culminated in a war in Donbas with Russia and Russian-backed separatists. The 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine began the current phase of the war.
Ukraine is a unitary state and its system of government is a semi-presidential republic. Ukraine has a transition economy and has the lowest nominal GDP per capita in Europe as of 2024.  Due to its extensive fertile land, the country is an important exporter of grain, though grain production has declined since 2022 due to the Russo-Ukrainian war, endangering global food security. Ukraine is considered a middle power in global affairs. Its military is the sixth largest in the world with the eighth largest defence budget, and operates one of the world's largest and most diverse drone fleets. Ukraine is a founding member of the United Nations and a member of the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organisation, and the OSCE. It has been in the process of joining the European Union and applied to join NATO in 2022.

Name
The name of Ukraine is frequently interpreted as coming from the old Slavic term for 'borderland' as is the word krajina. 
Another interpretation is that the name of Ukraine means "region" or "country".
In the English-speaking world during most of the 20th century, Ukraine (whether independent or not) was referred to as "the Ukraine". This is because in Russian, the word ukraina means 'borderland' so the definite article would be natural in the English language; this is similar to Nederlanden, which means 'low lands' and is rendered in English as "the Netherlands". However, since Ukraine's declaration of independence in 1991, this usage has become politicised and is now rarer, and style guides advise against its use. U.S. ambassador William Taylor said that using "the Ukraine" implies disregard for Ukrainian sovereignty. The official Ukrainian position is that "the Ukraine" is both grammatically and politically incorrect.

History
Early history
Evidence for the earliest securely dated hominin presence in Europe comes from 1.4 million-year-old stone tools from Korolevo, in western Ukraine. Settlement by modern humans in Ukraine and its vicinity dates back to 32,000 BC, with evidence of the Gravettian culture in the Crimean Mountains. By 4,500 BC, the Neolithic Cucuteni–Trypillia culture was flourishing in wide areas of modern Ukraine, including Trypillia and the entire Dnieper-Dniester region. Ukraine is a probable location for the first domestication of the horse. The Kurgan hypothesis places the Volga-Dnieper region of Ukraine and southern Russia as the linguistic homeland of the Proto-Indo-Europeans. Early Indo-European migrations from the Pontic steppes in the 3rd millennium BC spread Yamnaya Steppe pastoralist ancestry and Indo-European languages across large parts of Europe. During the Iron Age, the land was inhabited by Iranian-speaking Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians. Between 700 BC and 200 BC it was part of the Scythian kingdom.
From the 6th century BC, Greek, Roman, and Byzantine colonies were established on the north-eastern shore of the Black Sea, such as at Tyras, Olbia, and Chersonesus. These thrived into the 6th century AD. The Goths stayed in the area, but came under the sway of the Huns from the 370s. In the 7th century, the territory that is now eastern Ukraine was the centre of Old Great Bulgaria. At the end of the century, the majority of Bulgar tribes migrated in different directions, and the Khazars took over much of the land.
In the 5th and 6th centuries, the Antes, which some relate as an early Slavic people, lived in Ukraine. Migrations from the territories of present-day Ukraine throughout the Balkans established many South Slavic nations. Northern migrations, reaching almost to Lake Ilmen, led to the emergence of the Ilmen Slavs and Krivichs. Following an Avar raid in 602 and the collapse of the Antes Union, most of these peoples survived as separate tribes until the beginning of the second millennium.

Golden Age of Kyiv
The establishment of the state of Kievan Rus' remains obscure and uncertain. The state included much of present-day Ukraine, Belarus and the western part of European Russia. According to the Primary Chronicle, the Rus' people initially consisted of Varangians from Scandinavia. In 882, the pagan Prince Oleg (Oleh) conquered Kyiv from Askold and Dir and proclaimed it as the new capital of the Rus'. Anti-Normanist historians however argue that the East Slavic tribes along the southern parts of the Dnieper River were already in the process of forming a state independently. The Varangian elite, including the ruling Rurik dynasty, later assimilated into the Slavic population. Kievan Rus' was composed of several principalities ruled by the interrelated Rurikid kniazes ("princes"), who often fought each other for possession of Kyiv.
During the 10th and 11th centuries, Kievan Rus' became the largest and most powerful state in Europe, a period known as its Golden Age. It began with the reign of Vladimir the Great (980–1015), who introduced Christianity. During the reign of his son, Yaroslav the Wise (1019–1054), Kievan Rus' reached the zenith of its cultural development and military power. The state soon fragmented as the relative importance of regional powers rose again. After a final resurgence under the rule of Vladimir II Monomakh (1113–1125) and his son Mstislav (1125–1132), Kievan Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities following Mstislav's death, though ownership of Kyiv would still carry great prestige for decades. In the 11th and 12th centuries, the nomadic confederacy of the Turkic-speaking Cumans and Kipchaks was the dominant force in the Pontic steppe north of the Black Sea.
The Mongol invasions in the mid-13th century devastated Kievan Rus'; following the Siege of Kyiv in 1240, the city was destroyed by the Mongols. In the western territories, the principalities of Halych and Volhynia had arisen earlier, and were merged to form the Principality of Galicia–Volhynia. Daniel of Galicia, son of Roman the Great, re-united much of south-western Rus', including Volhynia, Galicia, as well as Kyiv. He was subsequently crowned by a papal envoy as the first king of Galicia–Volhynia (also known as the Kingdom of Ruthenia) in 1253.

Foreign domination
In 1349, in the aftermath of the Galicia–Volhynia Wars, the region was partitioned between the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. From the mid-13th century to the late 1400s, the Republic of Genoa founded numerous colonies on the northern coast of the Black Sea and transformed these into large commercial centres headed by the consul, a representative of the Republic. In 1430, the region of Podolia was incorporated into Poland, and the lands of modern-day Ukraine became increasingly settled by Poles. In 1441, Genghisid prince Haci I Giray founded the Crimean Khanate on the Crimean Peninsula and the surrounding steppes; the Khanate orchestrated Tatar slave raids. Over the next three centuries, the Crimean slave trade would enslave an estimated two million in the region.
In 1569, the Union of Lublin established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and most of the Ukrainian lands were transferred from Lithuania to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, becoming de jure Polish territory. Under the pressures of Polonisation, many landed gentry of Ruthenia converted to Catholicism and joined the circles of the Polish nobility; others joined the newly created Ruthenian Uniate Church.

Cossack Hetmanate
Deprived of native protectors among the Ruthenian nobility, the peasants and townspeople began turning for protection to the emerging Zaporozhian Cossacks. In the mid-17th century, a Cossack military quasi-state, the Zaporozhian Host, was formed by Dnieper Cossacks and Ruthenian peasants. Poland exercised little real control over this population, but found the Cossacks to be useful against the Turks and Tatars, and at times the two were allies in military campaigns. However, the continued harsh enserfment of Ruthenian peasantry by Polish szlachta (many of whom were Polonised Ruthenian nobles) and the suppression of the Orthodox Church alienated the Cossacks. The latter did not shy from taking up arms against those they perceived as enemies and occupiers, including the Catholic Church with its local representatives.

In 1648, Bohdan Khmelnytsky led the largest of the Cossack uprisings against the Commonwealth and the Polish king, which enjoyed wide support from the local population. Khmelnytsky founded the Cossack Hetmanate, which existed until 1764 (some sources claim until 1782). After Khmelnytsky suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Berestechko in 1651, he turned to the Russian tsar for help. In 1654, Khmelnytsky was subject to the Pereiaslav Agreement, forming a military and political alliance with Russia that acknowledged loyalty to the Russian monarch.
After his death, the Hetmanate went through a devastating 30-year war amongst Russia, Poland, the Crimean Khanate, the Ottoman Empire, and Cossacks, known as "The Ruin" (1657–1686), for control of the Cossack Hetmanate. The Treaty of Perpetual Peace between Russia and Poland in 1686 divided the lands of the Cossack Hetmanate between them, reducing the portion over which Poland had claimed sovereignty to Ukraine west of the Dnieper river. In 1686, the Metropolitanate of Kyiv was annexed by the Moscow Patriarchate through a synodal letter of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Dionysius IV, thus placing the Metropolitanate of Kyiv under the authority of Moscow. An attempt to reverse the decline was undertaken by Cossack Hetman Ivan Mazepa (1639–1709), who ultimately defected to the Swedes in the Great Northern War (1700–1721) in a bid to get rid of Russian dependence, but Hetmanate's capital city Baturyn was sacked (1708) and they were crushed in the Battle of Poltava (1709).
The Hetmanate's autonomy was severely restricted since Poltava. In the years 1764–1781, Catherine the Great incorporated much of Central Ukraine into the Russian Empire, abolishing the Cossack Hetmanate and the Zaporozhian Sich, and was one of the people responsible for the suppression of the last major Cossack uprising, the Koliivshchyna. After the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 1783, the newly acquired lands, now called Novorossiya, were opened up to settlement by Russians. The tsarist autocracy established a policy of Russification, suppressing the use of the Ukrainian language and curtailing the Ukrainian national identity. The western part of present-day Ukraine was subsequently split between Russia and Habsburg-ruled Austria after the fall of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795.

19th and early 20th century
The 19th century saw the rise of Ukrainian nationalism. With growing urbanisation and modernisation and a cultural trend toward romantic nationalism, a Ukrainian intelligentsia committed to national rebirth and social justice emerged. The serf-turned-national-poet Taras Shevchenko (1814–1861) and political theorist Mykhailo Drahomanov (1841–1895) led the growing nationalist movement. While conditions for its development in Austrian Galicia under the Habsburgs were relatively lenient, the Russian part (historically known as "Little Russia" or "South Russia") faced severe restrictions, going as far as banning virtually all books from being published in Ukrainian in 1876.
Ukraine, like the rest of the Russian Empire, joined the Industrial Revolution later than most of Western Europe due to the maintenance of serfdom until 1861. Other than near the newly discovered coal fields of the Donbas, and in some larger cities such as Odesa and Kyiv, Ukraine largely remained an agricultural and resource extraction economy. The Austrian part of Ukraine was particularly destitute, which forced hundreds of thousands of peasants into emigration, who created the backbone of an extensive Ukrainian diaspora in countries such as Canada, the United States and Brazil. Some of the Ukrainians settled in the Far East, too. According to the 1897 census, there were 223,000 ethnic Ukrainians in Siberia and 102,000 in Central Asia. An additional 1.6 million emigrated to the east in the ten years after the opening of the Trans-Siberian Railway in 1906. Far Eastern areas with an ethnic Ukrainian population became known as Green Ukraine.
Ukraine plunged into turmoil with the beginning of World War I, and fighting on Ukrainian soil persisted until late 1921. Initially, the Ukrainians were split between Austria-Hungary, fighting for the Central Powers, though the vast majority served in the Imperial Russian Army, which was part of the Triple Entente, under Russia. As the Russian Empire collapsed, the conflict evolved into the Ukrainian War of Independence, with Ukrainians fighting alongside, or against, the Red, White, Black and Green armies, with the Poles, Hungarians (in Transcarpathia), and Germans also intervening at various times.

An attempt to create an independent state, the left-leaning Ukrainian People's Republic (UPR), was first announced by Mykhailo Hrushevsky, but the period was plagued by an extremely unstable political and military environment. It was first deposed in a coup d'état led by Pavlo Skoropadskyi, which yielded the Ukrainian State under the German protectorate, and the attempt to restore the UPR under the Directorate ultimately failed as the Ukrainian army was regularly overrun by other forces. The short-lived West Ukrainian People's Republic and Hutsul Republic also failed to join the rest of Ukraine.
The result of the conflict was a partial victory for the Second Polish Republic, which annexed the Western Ukrainian provinces, as well as a larger-scale victory for the pro-Soviet forces, which succeeded in dislodging the remaining factions and eventually established the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (Soviet Ukraine). Meanwhile, modern-day Bukovina was occupied by Romania and Carpathian Ruthenia was admitted to Czechoslovakia as an autonomous region.
The conflict over Ukraine, a part of the broader Russian Civil War, devastated the whole of the former Russian Empire, including eastern and central Ukraine. The fighting left over 1.5 million people dead and hundreds of thousands homeless in the former Russian Empire's territory. Famine in 1921 further hit the eastern provinces.

Inter-war period
During the inter-war period, in Poland, Marshal Józef Piłsudski sought Ukrainian support by offering local autonomy as a way to minimise Soviet influence in Poland's eastern Kresy region. However, this approach was abandoned after Piłsudski's death in 1935, due to continued unrest among the Ukrainian population, including assassinations of Polish government officials by the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN); with the Polish government responding by restricting rights of people who declared Ukrainian nationality. In consequence, the underground Ukrainian nationalist and militant movement, which arose in the 1920s gained wider support.
Meanwhile, the recently constituted Soviet Ukraine became one of the founding republics of the Soviet Union. During the 1920s, under the Ukrainisation policy pursued by the national Communist leadership of Mykola Skrypnyk, Soviet leadership at first encouraged a national renaissance in Ukrainian culture and language. Ukrainisation was part of the Soviet-wide policy of Korenisation (literally indigenisation), which was intended to promote the advancement of native peoples, their language and culture into the governance of their respective republics.
Around the same time, Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin instituted the New Economic Policy (NEP), which introduced a form of market socialism, allowing some private ownership of small and medium-sized productive enterprises, hoping to reconstruct the post-war Soviet Union that had been devastated by both WWI and later the civil war. The NEP was successful at restoring the formerly war-torn nation to pre-WWI levels of production and agricultural output by the mid-1920s, much of the latter based in Ukraine. These policies attracted many prominent former UNR figures, including former UNR leader Hrushevsky, to return to Soviet Ukraine, where they were accepted, and participated in the advancement of Ukrainian science and culture. In July 1922, arrests and deportations of Ukrainian intellectuals (e.g. university professors) began in Soviet Ukraine and continued throughout the 1920s.
This period was cut short when Joseph Stalin became the leader of the USSR following Lenin's death. Stalin did away with the NEP in what became known as the Great Break. Starting from the late 1920s and now with a centrally planned economy, Soviet Ukraine took part in an industrialisation scheme which quadrupled its industrial output during the 1930s.
Furthermore, Stalin sought to suppress Ukraine's aspirations for independence by taking severe measures to eliminate the Ukrainian peasantry and eradicate the nation's intellectual and cultural elite. As a consequence of Stalin's new policy, the Ukrainian peasantry suffered from the programme of collectivisation of agricultural crops. Collectivisation was part of the first five-year plan and was enforced by regular troops and the secret police known as Cheka. Those who resisted were arrested and deported to gulags and work camps. As members of the collective farms were sometimes not allowed to receive any grain until unrealistic quotas were met, millions starved to death in a famine known as the Holodomor or the "Great Famine", which was recognised by some countries as an act of genocide perpetrated by Joseph Stalin and other Soviet notables.
Following on the Russian Civil War and collectivisation, the Great Purge, while killing Stalin's perceived political enemies, resulted in a profound loss of a new generation of Ukrainian intelligentsia, known today as the Executed Renaissance.

World War II
Following the invasion of Poland in September 1939, German and Soviet troops divided the territory of Poland. Thus, Eastern Galicia and Volhynia with their Ukrainian population became part of Ukraine. For the first time in history, the nation was united. Further territorial gains were secured in 1940, when the Ukrainian SSR incorporated the northern and southern districts of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region from the territories the USSR forced Romania to cede, though it handed over the western part of the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic to the newly created Moldavian SSR. These territorial gains of the USSR were internationally recognised by the Paris peace treaties of 1947.
German armies invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, initiating nearly four years of total war. The Axis initially advanced against desperate but unsuccessful efforts of the Red Army. In the battle of Kyiv, the city was acclaimed as a "Hero City", because of its fierce resistance. More than 600,000 Soviet soldiers (or one-quarter of the Soviet Western Front) were killed or taken captive there, with many suffering severe mistreatment. After its conquest, most of the Ukrainian SSR was organised within the Reichskommissariat Ukraine, with the intention of exploiting its resources and eventual German settlement. Some western Ukrainians, who had only joined the Soviet Union in 1939, hailed the Germans as liberators, but that did not last long as the Nazis made little attempt to exploit dissatisfaction with Stalinist policies. Instead, the Nazis preserved the collective-farm system, carried out genocidal policies against Jews, deported millions of people to work in Germany, and began a depopulation programme to prepare for German colonisation. They blockaded the transport of food on the Dnieper River.
Although the majority of Ukrainians fought in or alongside the Red Army and Soviet resistance, in Western Ukraine an independent Ukrainian Insurgent Army movement arose (UPA, 1942). It was created as the armed forces of the underground Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN). Both organisations, the OUN and the UPA, supported the goal of an independent Ukrainian state on the territory with a Ukrainian ethnic majority. Although this brought conflict with Nazi Germany, at times the Melnyk wing of the OUN allied with the Nazi forces. From mid-1943 until the end of the war, the UPA carried out massacres of ethnic Poles in the Volhynia and Eastern Galicia regions, killing around 100,000 Polish civilians, which brought reprisals. These organised massacres were an attempt by the OUN to create a homogeneous Ukrainian state without a Polish minority living within its borders, and to prevent the post-war Polish state from asserting its sovereignty over areas that had been part of pre-war Poland. After the war, the UPA continued to fight the USSR until the 1950s. At the same time, the Ukrainian Liberation Army, another nationalist movement, fought alongside the Nazis.

In total, the number of ethnic Ukrainians who fought in the ranks of the Soviet Army is estimated from 4.5 million to 7 million; half of the Pro-Soviet partisan guerrilla resistance units, which counted up to 500,000 troops in 1944, were also Ukrainian. Generally, the Ukrainian Insurgent Army's figures are unreliable, with figures ranging anywhere from 15,000 to as many as 100,000 fighters.
The vast majority of the fighting in World War II took place on the Eastern Front. The total losses inflicted upon the Ukrainian population during the war are estimated at 6 million, including an estimated one and a half million Jews killed by the Einsatzgruppen, sometimes with the help of local collaborators. Of the estimated 8.6 million Soviet troop losses, 1.4 million were ethnic Ukrainians. The Victory Day is celebrated as one of eleven Ukrainian national holidays.

Post–war Soviet Ukraine
The republic was heavily damaged by the war, and it required significant efforts to recover. More than 700 cities and towns and 28,000 villages were destroyed. The situation was worsened by a famine in 1946–1947, which was caused by a drought and the wartime destruction of infrastructure, killing at least tens of thousands of people. In 1945, the Ukrainian SSR became one of the founding members of the United Nations (UN), part of a special agreement at the Yalta Conference, and, alongside Belarus, had voting rights in the UN even though they were not independent. Moreover, Ukraine once more expanded its borders as it annexed Zakarpattia, and the population became much more homogenised due to post-war population transfers, most of which, as in the case of Germans and Crimean Tatars, were forced. As of 1 January 1953, Ukrainians were second only to Russians among adult "special deportees", comprising 20% of the total.
Following the death of Stalin in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev became the new leader of the USSR, who began the policies of de-stalinisation and the Khrushchev Thaw. During his term as head of the Soviet Union, Crimea was transferred from the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian SSR, formally as a friendship gift to Ukraine and for economic reasons. This represented the final extension of Ukrainian territory and formed the basis for the internationally recognised borders of Ukraine to this day. Many top positions in the Soviet Union were occupied by Ukrainians, including notably Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982. However, it was he and his appointee in Ukraine, Volodymyr Shcherbytsky, who presided over the extensive Russification of Ukraine and who were instrumental in repressing a new generation of Ukrainian intellectuals known as the Sixtiers.
By 1950, the republic had fully surpassed pre-war levels of industry and production. Soviet Ukraine soon became a European leader in industrial production and an important centre of the Soviet arms industry and high-tech research, though heavy industry still had an outsided influence. The Soviet government invested in hydroelectric and nuclear power projects to cater to the energy demand that the development carried. On 26 April 1986, however, a reactor in the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant exploded, resulting in the Chernobyl disaster, the worst nuclear reactor accident in history.

Independence
Mikhail Gorbachev pursued a policy of limited liberalisation of public life, known as perestroika, and attempted to reform a stagnating economy. The latter failed, but the democratisation of the Soviet Union fuelled nationalist and separatist tendencies among the ethnic minorities, including Ukrainians. As part of the so-called parade of sovereignties, on 16 July 1990, the newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic adopted the Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine. After a failed coup by some Communist leaders in Moscow at deposing Gorbachov, outright independence was proclaimed on 24 August 1991. It was approved by 92% of the Ukrainian electorate in a referendum on 1 December. Ukraine's new president, Leonid Kravchuk, went on to sign the Belavezha Accords and made Ukraine a founding member of the much looser Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), though Ukraine never became a full member of the latter as it did not ratify the agreement founding CIS. These documents sealed the fate of the Soviet Union, which formally voted itself out of existence on 26 December.
Ukraine was initially viewed as having favourable economic conditions in comparison to the other regions of the Soviet Union, though it was one of the poorer Soviet republics by the time of the dissolution. However, during its transition to the market economy, the country experienced deeper economic slowdown than almost all of the other former Soviet Republics. During the recession, between 1991 and 1999, Ukraine lost 60% of its GDP and suffered from hyperinflation that peaked at 10,000% in 1993. The situation only stabilised well after the new currency, the hryvnia, fell sharply in late 1998 partially as a fallout from the Russian debt default earlier that year. The legacy of the economic policies of the nineties was the mass privatisation of state property that created a class of extremely powerful and rich individuals known as the oligarchs. The country then fell into a series of sharp recessions as a result of the Great Recession, the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, and finally, the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine by Russia on 24 February 2022. Ukraine's economy in general underperformed since the time independence came due to pervasive corruption and mismanagement, which, particularly in the 1990s, led to protests and organised strikes. The war with Russia impeded meaningful economic recovery in the 2010s, while efforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, which arrived in 2020, were made much harder by low vaccination rates and, later in the pandemic, by the ongoing invasion.

From the political perspective, one of the defining features of the politics of Ukraine is that for most of the time, it has been divided along two issues: the relation between Ukraine, the West and Russia, and the classical left-right divide. The first two presidents, Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma, tended to balance the competing visions of Ukraine, though Yushchenko and Yanukovych were generally pro-Western and pro-Russian, respectively. There were two major protests against Yanukovych: the Orange Revolution in 2004, when tens of thousands of people went in protest of election rigging in his favour (Yushchenko was eventually elected president), and another one in the winter of 2013/2014, when more gathered on the Euromaidan to oppose Yanukovych's refusal to sign the European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement. By the end of the protests on 21 February 2014, he fled from Ukraine and was removed by the parliament in what is termed the Revolution of Dignity, but Russia refused to recognise the interim pro-Western government, calling it a junta and denouncing the events as a coup d'état sponsored by the United States.
Despite the signing of the Budapest memorandum in 1994, in which Ukraine agreed to hand over nuclear weapons in exchange for guarantees of security and territorial integrity, Russia reacted violently to these developments and started a war against its western neighbour. In late February and early March 2014, it annexed Crimea using its Navy in Sevastopol as well as the so- called little green men; after this succeeded, it then launched a proxy war in the Donbas via the breakaway Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic. The first months of the conflict with the Russian-backed separatists were fluid, but Russian forces then started an open invasion in Donbas on 24 August 2014. Together they pushed back Ukrainian troops to the frontline established in February 2015, i.e. after Ukrainian troops withdrew from Debaltseve. It remained a frozen conflict until the early hours of 24 February 2022, when Russia launched the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. A year later, Russian troops controlled about 17% of Ukraine's internationally recognised territory, which constitutes 94% of Luhansk Oblast, 73% of Kherson Oblast, 72% of Zaporizhzhia Oblast, 54% of Donetsk Oblast and all of Crimea, though Russia failed with its initial plan, with Ukrainian troops recapturing some territory in counteroffensives.

The military conflict with Russia shifted the government's policy towards the West. Shortly after Yanukovych fled Ukraine, the country signed the EU association agreement in June 2014, and its citizens were granted visa-free travel to the European Union three years later. In January 2019, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was recognised as independent of Moscow, which reversed the 1686 decision of the patriarch of Constantinople and dealt a further blow to Moscow's influence in Ukraine. Finally, amid a full-scale war with Russia, Ukraine was granted candidate status to the European Union on 23 June 2022. A broad anti-corruption drive began in early 2023 with the resignations of several deputy ministers and regional heads during a reshuffle of the government.

Geography
Ukraine is the second-largest European country, after Russia, and the largest country entirely in Europe. Lying between latitudes 44° and 53° N, and longitudes 22° and 41° E., it is mostly in the East European Plain. Ukraine covers an area of 603,550 square kilometres (233,030 sq mi), with a coastline of 2,782 kilometres (1,729 mi).
The landscape of Ukraine consists mostly of fertile steppes (plains with few trees) and plateaus, crossed by rivers such as the Dnieper, Seversky Donets, Dniester and the Southern Bug as they flow south into the Black Sea and the smaller Sea of Azov. To the southwest, the Danube Delta forms the border with Romania. Ukraine's regions have diverse geographic features, ranging from the highlands to the lowlands. The country's only mountains are the Carpathian Mountains in the west, of which the highest is Hoverla at 2,061 metres (6,762 ft), and the Crimean Mountains, in the extreme south along the coast.
Ukraine also has a number of highland regions such as the Volyn-Podillia Upland (in the west) and the Near-Dnipro Upland (on the right bank of the Dnieper). To the east there are the south-western spurs of the Central Russian Upland over which runs the border with Russia. Near the Sea of Azov are the Donets Ridge and the Near Azov Upland. The snow melt from the mountains feeds the rivers and their waterfalls.
Significant natural resources in Ukraine include lithium, natural gas, kaolin, timber and an abundance of arable land. Ukraine has many environmental issues. Some regions lack adequate supplies of potable water. Air and water pollution affects the country, as well as deforestation, and radiation contamination in the northeast from the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant. The environmental damage caused by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine has been described as an ecocide. Within its first year alone, the conflict inflicted an estimated $51 billion in environmental damage, resulting in severe toxic soil pollution and millions of tonnes of contaminated debris. These ecological crises were further compounded in June 2023 by the catastrophic destruction of the Kakhovka Dam.

Climate
Ukraine is in the mid-latitudes, and generally has a continental climate, except for its southern coasts, which have cold semi-arid and humid subtropical climates. Average annual temperatures range from 5.5–7 °C (41.9–44.6 °F) in the north, to 11–13 °C (51.8–55.4 °F) in the south. Precipitation is highest in the west and north and lowest in the east and southeast. Western Ukraine, particularly in the Carpathian Mountains, receives around 120 centimetres (47.2 in) of precipitation annually, while Crimea and the coastal areas of the Black Sea receive around 40 centimetres (15.7 in).
Water availability from the major river basins is expected to decrease due to climate change, especially in summer. This poses risks to the agricultural sector. The negative impacts of climate change on agriculture are mostly felt in the south of the country, which has a steppe climate. In the north, some crops may be able to benefit from a longer growing season. The World Bank has stated that Ukraine is highly vulnerable to climate change.

Biodiversity
Ukraine contains six terrestrial ecoregions: Central European mixed forests, Crimean Submediterranean forest complex, East European forest steppe, Pannonian mixed forests, Carpathian montane conifer forests, and Pontic steppe. There is somewhat more coniferous than deciduous forest. The most densely forested area is Polisia in the northwest, with pine, oak, and birch. There are 45,000 species of animals (mostly invertebrates), with approximately 385 endangered species listed in the Red Data Book of Ukraine. Internationally important wetlands cover over 7,000 square kilometres (2,700 sq mi), with the Danube Delta being important for conservation.

Politics
Ukraine is a republic under a semi-presidential system with separate legislative, executive, and judicial branches.

Constitution
The Constitution of Ukraine was adopted and ratified at the 5th session of the Verkhovna Rada, the parliament of Ukraine, on 28 June 1996. The constitution was passed with 315 ayes out of 450 votes possible (300 ayes minimum). All other laws and other normative legal acts of Ukraine must conform to the constitution. The right to amend the constitution through a special legislative procedure is vested exclusively in the parliament. The only body that may interpret the constitution and determine whether legislation conforms to it is the Constitutional Court of Ukraine. Since 1996, the public holiday Constitution Day is celebrated on 28 June. On 7 February 2019, the Verkhovna Rada voted to amend the constitution to state Ukraine's strategic objectives as joining the European Union and NATO.

Government
The president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term and is the formal head of state.
Ukraine's legislative branch includes the 450-seat unicameral parliament, the Verkhovna Rada. The parliament is primarily responsible for the formation of the executive branch and the Cabinet of Ministers, headed by the prime minister. The president retains the authority to nominate the ministers of foreign affairs and of defence for parliamentary approval, as well as the power to appoint the prosecutor general and the head of the Security Service.
Laws, acts of the parliament and the cabinet, presidential decrees, and acts of the Crimean parliament may be abrogated by the Constitutional Court, should they be found to violate the constitution. Other normative acts are subject to judicial review. The Supreme Court is the main body in the system of courts of general jurisdiction.
Local self-government is officially guaranteed. Local councils and city mayors are popularly elected and exercise control over local budgets. The heads of regional and district administrations are appointed by the president in accordance with proposals of the prime minister.
The V-Dem Institute found ongoing democratic backsliding in Ukraine as of 2025 due to restrictions on freedom of speech and freedom of association.

Courts and law enforcement
Martial law was declared when Russia invaded in February 2022, and continues. The courts enjoy legal, financial and constitutional freedom guaranteed by Ukrainian law since 2002. Judges are largely well protected from dismissal (except for gross misconduct). Court justices are appointed by presidential decree for an initial period of five years, after which Ukraine's Supreme Council confirms their positions for life. Although there are still problems, the system is considered to have been much improved since Ukraine's independence in 1991. The Supreme Court is regarded as an independent and impartial body, and has on several occasions ruled against the Ukrainian government. The World Justice Project ranks Ukraine 66 out of 99 countries surveyed in its annual Rule of Law Index.
Prosecutors in Ukraine have greater powers than in most European countries, and according to the European Commission for Democracy through Law "the role and functions of the Prosecutor's Office is not in accordance with Council of Europe standards". The conviction rate is over 99%, equal to the conviction rate of the Soviet Union, with suspects often being incarcerated for long periods before trial.

In 2010, President Yanukovych formed an expert group to make recommendations on how to "clean up the current mess and adopt a law on court organisation". One day later, he stated "We can no longer disgrace our country with such a court system." The criminal judicial system and the prison system of Ukraine remain quite punitive.
Since 2010 court proceedings can be held in Russian by mutual consent of the parties. Citizens unable to speak Ukrainian or Russian may use their native language or the services of a translator. Previously all court proceedings had to be held in Ukrainian.
Law enforcement agencies are controlled by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They consist primarily of the national police force and various specialised units and agencies such as the State Border Guard and the Coast Guard services. Law enforcement agencies, particularly the police, faced criticism for their heavy handling of the 2004 Orange Revolution. Many thousands of police officers were stationed throughout the capital, primarily to dissuade protesters from challenging the state's authority but also to provide a quick reaction force in case of need; most officers were armed.

Administrative divisions
The system of Ukrainian subdivisions reflects the country's status as a unitary state (as stated in the country's constitution) with unified legal and administrative regimes for each unit.
Including Sevastopol and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea that were annexed by the Russian Federation in 2014, Ukraine consists of 27 regions: twenty-four oblasts (provinces), one autonomous republic (Autonomous Republic of Crimea), and two cities of special status—Kyiv, the capital, and Sevastopol. The 24 oblasts and Crimea are subdivided into 136 raions (districts) and city municipalities of regional significance, or second-level administrative units.
Populated places in Ukraine are split into two categories: urban and rural. Urban populated places are split further into cities and urban-type settlements (a Soviet administrative invention), while rural populated places consist of villages and settlements (a generally used term). All cities have a certain degree of self-rule depending on their significance such as national significance (as in the case of Kyiv and Sevastopol), regional significance (within each oblast or autonomous republic) or district significance (all the rest of cities). A city's significance depends on several factors such as its population, socio-economic and historical importance and infrastructure.

Foreign relations
From 1999 to 2001, Ukraine served as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council. Historically, Soviet Ukraine joined the United Nations in 1945 as one of the original members following a Western compromise with the Soviet Union. Ukraine has consistently supported peaceful, negotiated settlements to disputes. It has participated in the quadripartite talks on the conflict in Moldova and promoted a peaceful resolution to the conflict in the post-Soviet state of Georgia. Ukraine also has made contributions to UN peacekeeping operations since 1992.
Ukraine considers Euro-Atlantic integration its primary foreign policy objective, but in practice it has always balanced its relationship with the European Union and the United States with strong ties to Russia. The European Union's Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Ukraine went into force in 1998. The European Union (EU) has encouraged Ukraine to implement the PCA fully before discussions begin on an association agreement, issued at the EU Summit in December 1999 in Helsinki, recognises Ukraine's long-term aspirations but does not discuss association.
In 1992, Ukraine joined the then-Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (now the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)), and also became a member of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council. Ukraine–NATO relations are close and the country has declared interest in eventual membership.

Ukraine is the most active member of the Partnership for Peace (PfP). All major political parties in Ukraine support full eventual integration into the European Union. The Association Agreement between Ukraine and the European Union was signed in 2014. Ukraine long had close ties with all its neighbours, but Russia–Ukraine relations rapidly deteriorated in 2014 due to the annexation of Crimea, energy dependence and payment disputes.The Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA), which entered into force in January 2016 following the ratification of the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement, formally integrates Ukraine into the European Single Market and the European Economic Area. Ukraine receives further support and assistance for its EU-accession aspirations from the International Visegrád Fund of the Visegrád Group that consists of Central European EU members the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and Slovakia.
In 2020, in Lublin, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine created the Lublin Triangle initiative, which aims to create further cooperation between the three historical countries of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and further Ukraine's integration and accession to the EU and NATO.
In 2021, the Association Trio was formed by signing a joint memorandum between the Foreign Ministers of Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. The Association Trio is a tripartite format for enhanced cooperation, coordination, and dialogue between the three countries (that have signed the Association Agreement with the EU) with the European Union on issues of common interest related to European integration, enhancing cooperation within the framework of the Eastern Partnership, and committing to the prospect of joining the European Union. As of 2021, Ukraine was preparing to formally apply for EU membership in 2024, in order to join the European Union in the 2030s, however, with the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy requested that the country be admitted to the EU immediately. Candidate status was granted in June 2022. In recent years, Ukraine has dramatically strengthened its ties with the United States.
In June 2025, Ukraine legalised multiple citizenship.

Military
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine inherited a 780,000-man military force on its territory, equipped with the third-largest nuclear weapons arsenal in the world. In 1992, Ukraine signed the Lisbon Protocol in which the country agreed to give up all nuclear weapons to Russia for disposal and to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapon state. By 1996 the country had become free of nuclear weapons.
Ukraine took consistent steps toward reduction of conventional weapons. It signed the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which called for reduction of tanks, artillery, and armoured vehicles (army forces were reduced to 300,000). The country planned to convert the current conscript-based military into a professional volunteer military. Ukraine's current military consist of 196,600 active personnel and around 900,000 reservists.

Ukraine played an increasing role in peacekeeping operations. In 2014, the Ukrainian frigate Hetman Sagaidachniy joined the European Union's counter-piracy Operation Atalanta and was part of the EU Naval Force off the coast of Somalia for two months. Ukrainian troops were deployed in Kosovo as part of the Ukrainian-Polish Battalion. In 2003–2005, a Ukrainian unit was deployed as part of the multinational force in Iraq under Polish command. Military units of other states participated in multinational military exercises with Ukrainian forces in Ukraine regularly, including U.S. military forces.
Following independence, Ukraine declared itself a neutral state. The country had a limited military partnership with Russian Federation and other CIS countries and has had a partnership with NATO since 1994. In the 2000s, the government was leaning towards NATO, and deeper cooperation with the alliance was set by the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan signed in 2002. It was later agreed that the question of joining NATO should be answered by a national referendum at some point in the future. Deposed President Viktor Yanukovych considered the then level of co-operation between Ukraine and NATO sufficient, and was against Ukraine joining NATO. During the 2008 Bucharest summit, NATO declared that Ukraine would eventually become a member of NATO when it meets the criteria for accession.
As part of its modernisation after the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, junior officers were allowed to take more initiative and a territorial defence force of volunteers was established. Various defensive weapons including drones were supplied by many countries, but not fighter jets. During the first few weeks of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine the military found it difficult to defend against shelling, missiles and high level bombing; but light infantry used shoulder-mounted weapons effectively to destroy tanks, armoured vehicles and low-flying aircraft. In August 2023, the U.S. officials estimated that up to 70,000 Ukrainian soldiers were killed and 100,000 to 120,000 wounded during the Russo-Ukrainian war.

Economy
In 2021, agriculture was the biggest sector of the economy. Ukraine is one of the world's largest wheat exporters. It remains among the poorest countries in Europe with the lowest nominal GDP per capita. Despite improvements, as in Moldova corruption in Ukraine remains an obstacle to joining the EU; the country was rated 104th out of 181 in the Corruption Perceptions Index for 2025. In 2021, Ukraine's GDP per capita by purchasing power parity was just over $14,000. Despite supplying emergency financial support, the IMF expected the economy to shrink considerably by 35% in 2022 due to the Russo-Ukrainian war. One 2022 estimate was that post-war reconstruction costs might reach half a trillion dollars.
In 2021, the average salary in Ukraine reached its highest level at almost ₴14,300 (US$525) per month. About 1% of Ukrainians lived below the national poverty line in 2019. Unemployment in Ukraine was 4.5% in 2019. In 2019 5–15% of the Ukrainian population were categorised as middle class. In 2020 Ukraine's government debt was roughly 50% of its nominal GDP.
In 2021 mineral commodities and light industry were important sectors. Ukraine produces nearly all types of transportation vehicles and spacecraft. The European Union is the country's main trade partner, and remittances from Ukrainians working abroad are important.

Agriculture
Ukraine is among the world's top agricultural producers and exporters and is often described as the "bread basket of Europe". During the 2020/21 international wheat marketing season (July–June), it ranked as the sixth largest wheat exporter, accounting for nine percent of world wheat trade. The country is also a major global exporter of maize, barley and rapeseed. In 2020/21, it accounted for 12 percent of global trade in maize and barley and for 14 percent of world rapeseed exports. Its trade share is even greater in the sunflower oil sector, with the country accounting for about 50 percent of world exports in 2020/2021.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), further to causing the loss of lives and increasing humanitarian needs, the likely disruptions caused by the Russo-Ukrainian War to Ukraine's grain and oilseed sectors, could jeopardise the food security of many countries, especially those that are highly dependent on Ukraine and Russia for their food and fertiliser imports. Several of these countries fall into the Least Developed Country (LDC) group, while many others belong to the group of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries (LIFDCs). For example Eritrea sourced 47 percent of its wheat imports in 2021 from Ukraine. Overall, more than 30 nations depend on Ukraine and the Russian Federation for over 30 percent of their wheat import needs, many of them in North Africa and Western and Central Asia.

Tourism
Before the Russo-Ukrainian war the number of tourists visiting Ukraine was eighth in Europe, according to UN Tourism rankings. Ukraine has numerous tourist attractions: mountain ranges suitable for skiing, hiking and fishing; the Black Sea coastline as a popular summer destination; nature reserves of different ecosystems; and churches, castle ruins and other architectural and park landmarks. Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kamianets-Podilskyi were Ukraine's principal tourist centres, each offering many historical landmarks and extensive hospitality infrastructure. The Seven Wonders of Ukraine and Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine are selections of the most important landmarks of Ukraine, chosen by Ukrainian experts and an Internet-based public vote. Tourism was the mainstay of Crimea's economy before a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014.

Transport
Many roads and bridges were destroyed, and international maritime travel was blocked by the Russo-Ukrainian war. Before that it was mainly through the Port of Odesa, from where ferries sailed regularly to Istanbul, Varna and Haifa. The largest ferry company operating these routes was Ukrferry. There are over 1,600 km (1,000 mi) of navigable waterways on 7 rivers, mostly on the Danube, Dnieper and Pripyat. All Ukraine's rivers freeze over in winter, limiting navigation.
Ukraine's rail network connects all major urban areas, port facilities and industrial centres. The heaviest concentration of railway track is the Donbas region. Although rail freight transport fell in the 1990s, Ukraine is still one of the world's highest rail users. Ukraine also has multiple urban rail systems, particularly three metro (Dnipro, Kharkiv, and Kyiv), two light rail (Kryvyi Rih and Kyiv), two urban elektrychka (Kamianske–Dnipro–Synelnykove and Kyiv), two cable railway (Kyiv and Odesa), and numerous tramway systems.
Ukraine International Airlines, is the flag carrier and the largest airline, with its head office in Kyiv and its main hub at Kyiv's Boryspil International Airport. It operated domestic and international passenger flights and cargo services to Europe, the Middle East, the United States, Canada, and Asia.

Energy
Energy in Ukraine is mainly from gas and coal, followed by nuclear then oil. The coal industry has been disrupted by conflict. Most gas and oil is imported, but since 2015 energy policy has prioritised diversifying energy supply.
About half of electricity generation is nuclear and a quarter coal. The largest nuclear power plant in Europe, the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant, is in Ukraine. Fossil fuel subsidies were US$2.2 billion in 2019. Until the 2010s all of Ukraine's nuclear fuel came from Russia, but now most does not.
Some energy infrastructure was destroyed in the Russo-Ukrainian war. The contract to transit Russian gas expires at the end of 2024.
In early 2022 Ukraine and Moldova decoupled their electricity grids from the Integrated Power System of Russia and Belarus; and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity synchronised them with continental Europe.

Information technology
Key officials may use Starlink as backup. The IT industry contributed almost 5 per cent to Ukraine's GDP in 2021 and in 2022 continued both inside and outside the country.

Demographics
Before the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the country had an estimated population of over 41 million people, and was the eighth-most populous country in Europe. It is a heavily urbanised country, and its industrial regions in the east and southeast are the most densely populated—about 67% of its total population lives in urban areas. At that time Ukraine had a population density of 69.5 inhabitants per square kilometre (180 inhabitants/mi2), and the overall life expectancy in the country at birth was 73 years (68 years for males and 77.8 years for females).
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine's population hit a peak of roughly 52 million in 1993. However, due to its death rate exceeding its birth rate, mass emigration, poor living conditions, and low-quality health care, the total population decreased by 6.6 million, or 12.8% from the same year to 2014.
According to the 2001 census, ethnic Ukrainians made up roughly 78% of the population, while Russians were the largest minority, at some 17.3% of the population. Small minority populations included: Belarusians (0.6%), Moldovans (0.5%), Crimean Tatars (0.5%), Bulgarians (0.4%), Hungarians (0.3%), Romanians (0.3%), Poles (0.3%), Jews (0.3%), Armenians (0.2%), Greeks (0.2%) and Tatars (0.2%). It was also estimated that there were about 10–40,000 Koreans in Ukraine, who lived mostly in the south of the country, belonging to the historical Koryo-saram group, as well as about 47,600 Roma (though the Council of Europe estimates a higher number of about 260,000).
Outside the former Soviet Union, the largest source of incoming immigrants in Ukraine's post-independence period was from four Asian countries, namely China, India, Pakistan and Afghanistan. In the late 2010s 1.4 million Ukrainians were internally displaced due to the war in Donbas, and in early 2022, over 4.1 million fled the country after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, causing the Ukrainian refugee crisis. Most male Ukrainian nationals aged 18 to 60 were denied exit from Ukraine. The Ukrainian government estimates that the population in the regions controlled by Ukraine was 25 to 27 million in 2024.

Urban areas
Ukraine has 457 cities, of which 176 are designated as oblast-class, 279 as smaller raion-class cities, and two as special legal status cities. There are also 886 urban-type settlements and 28,552 villages.

Language
According to Ukraine's constitution, the state language is Ukrainian. Russian is widely spoken in the country, especially in eastern and southern Ukraine. Most native Ukrainian speakers know Russian as a second language. Russian was the de facto dominant language of the Soviet Union but Ukrainian also held official status in the republic, and in the schools of the Ukrainian SSR, learning Ukrainian was mandatory.
Ukrainian is the primary language used in the vast majority of Ukraine. 67% of Ukrainians speak Ukrainian as their primary language, while 30% speak Russian as their primary language. In eastern and southern Ukraine, Russian is the primary language in some cities, while Ukrainian is used in rural areas. Romanian is spoken in Chernivtsi Oblast and parts of Odesa and Zakarpattia oblasts, while Hungarian is spoken in Zakarpattia Oblast. There is no consensus among scholars whether Rusyn, also spoken in Zakarpattia, is a distinct language or a dialect of Ukrainian. The Ukrainian government does not recognise Rusyn and Rusyns as a distinct language and people.
For a large part of the Soviet era, the number of Ukrainian speakers declined from generation to generation, and by the mid-1980s, the usage of the Ukrainian language in public life had decreased significantly. Following independence, the government of Ukraine began restoring the use of the Ukrainian language in schools and government through a policy of Ukrainisation.
Effective in August 2012, a new law on regional languages entitled any local language spoken by at least a 10 percent minority be declared official within that area. Within weeks, Russian was declared a regional language of several southern and eastern oblasts (provinces) and cities. Russian could then be used in the administrative office work and documents of those places.
In 2014, following the Revolution of Dignity, the Ukrainian Parliament voted to repeal the law on regional languages, making Ukrainian the sole state language at all levels; however, the repeal was not signed by acting President Turchynov or by President Poroshenko. In 2019, the law allowing for official use of regional languages was found unconstitutional. According to the Council of Europe, this act fails to achieve fair protection of the linguistic rights of minorities. Presently, most foreign films and TV programmes, including Russian ones, are subtitled or dubbed in Ukrainian. Ukraine's 2017 education law bars primary education in public schools in grade five and up in any language but Ukrainian.

Since 2014, during the Russian-Ukrainian war, Russia has been pursuing a policy of forced Russification of the territories of Ukraine it has occupied — schools teach only in Russian, even in entirely Ukrainian-speaking settlements. Ukrainian school textbooks have been banned, and those who wish to study in Ukrainian are forced to do so in secret from the occupation authorities. Ukrainian-language literature is also being destroyed on a massive scale. According to the report "Ukraine: Forced Russified Education Under Occupation" by Human Rights Watch, the Russian occupation authorities and other high-ranking Russian officials have taken and continue to take measures to eradicate the Ukrainian language in the occupied territories. Ukrainian children forcibly deported to Russia are also subjected to Russification.
At the same time, Russian armed aggression provoked significant changes in the Ukrainian society's perception of the language issue: a significant part of the formerly Russian-speaking population switched to speaking Ukrainian, and the popularity of the idea of granting Russian official status throughout all of Ukraine or certain regions of the country has reached its lowest level since polling began in 1997.

Diaspora
The Ukrainian diaspora comprises Ukrainians and their descendants who live outside Ukraine around the world, especially those who maintain some kind of connection to the land of their ancestors and maintain their feeling of Ukrainian national identity within their own local community. The Ukrainian diaspora is found throughout numerous regions worldwide including other post-Soviet states as well as in Canada, and other countries such as Poland, the United States, the UK and Brazil.
The Russo-Ukrainian war has led to the Ukrainian refugee crisis in which millions of Ukrainian civilians moved to neighbouring countries. Most crossed into Poland, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic, and others proceeded to at least temporarily settle in Hungary, Moldova, Germany, Austria, Romania and other European countries.

Religion
Ukraine has the world's second-largest Eastern Orthodox population, after Russia. A 2021 survey conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) found that 82% of Ukrainians declared themselves to be religious, while 7% were atheists, and a further 11% found it difficult to answer the question. The level of religiosity in Ukraine was reported to be the highest in Western Ukraine (91%), and the lowest in the Donbas (57%) and Eastern Ukraine (56%).
In 2019, 82% of Ukrainians were Christians; out of which 72.7% declared themselves to be Eastern Orthodox, 8.8% Ukrainian Greek Catholics, 2.3% Protestants and 0.9% Latin Church Catholics. Other Christians comprised 2.3%. Judaism, Islam, and Hinduism were the religions of 0.2% of the population each. According to the KIIS study, roughly 58.3% of the Ukrainian Orthodox population were members of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, and 25.4% were members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate). Protestants are a growing community in Ukraine, who made up 1.9% of the population in 2016, but rose to 2.2% of the population in 2018.

Health
Ukraine's healthcare system is state subsidised and freely available to all Ukrainian citizens and registered residents. However, it is not compulsory to be treated in a state-run hospital as a number of private medical complexes do exist nationwide. The public sector employs most healthcare professionals, with those working for private medical centres typically also retaining their state employment as they are mandated to provide care at public health facilities on a regular basis.
All of Ukraine's medical service providers and hospitals are subordinate to the Ministry of Healthcare, which provides oversight and scrutiny of general medical practice as well as being responsible for the day-to-day administration of the healthcare system. Despite this, standards of hygiene and patient-care have fallen.
Ukraine faces a number of major public health issues and is considered to be in a demographic crisis because of its high death rate, low birth rate, and high emigration. A factor contributing to the high death rate is a high mortality rate among working-age males from preventable causes such as alcohol poisoning and smoking.
Active reformation of Ukraine's healthcare system was initiated right after the appointment of Ulana Suprun as a head of the Ministry of Healthcare. Assisted by deputy Pavlo Kovtoniuk, Suprun first changed the distribution of finances in healthcare. Funds must follow the patient. General practitioners will provide basic care for patients. The patient will have the right to choose one. Emergency medical service is considered to be fully funded by the state. Emergency Medicine Reform is also an important part of the healthcare reform. In addition, patients who suffer from chronic diseases, which cause a high toll of disability and mortality, are provided with free or low-price medicine.
As a result of the Russo-Ukrainian war, millions in Ukraine suffered physical injuries and psychological traumas. The World Health Organization has documented over 2,254 attacks on healthcare in Ukraine since the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. According to the October 2024 data of the World Health Organization Ukraine health needs assessment, 68% of Ukrainians reported that their health declined compared to the pre-war period. The war with Russia worsened Ukrainian children physical and mental health.

Education
According to the Ukrainian constitution, access to free education is granted to all citizens. Complete general secondary education is compulsory in the state schools which constitute the overwhelming majority. Free higher education in state and communal educational establishments is provided on a competitive basis.
Because of the Soviet Union's emphasis on total access of education for all citizens, which continues today, the literacy rate is an estimated 99.4%. Since 2005, an eleven-year school programme has been replaced with a twelve-year one: primary education takes four years to complete (starting at age six), middle education (secondary) takes five years to complete; upper secondary then takes three years. Students in the 12th grade take Government tests, which are also referred to as school-leaving exams. These tests are later used for university admissions.
Among the oldest is also the Lviv University, founded in 1661. More higher education institutions were set up in the 19th century, beginning with universities in Kharkiv (1805), Kyiv (1834), Odesa (1865) and Chernivtsi (1875) and a number of professional higher education institutions, e.g.: Nizhyn Historical and Philological Institute (originally established as the Gymnasium of Higher Sciences in 1805), a Veterinary Institute (1873) and a Technological Institute (1885) in Kharkiv, a Polytechnic Institute in Kyiv (1898) and a Higher Mining School (1899) in Katerynoslav. Rapid growth followed in the Soviet period. By 1988 the number of higher education institutions increased to 146 with over 850,000 students.
The Ukrainian higher education system comprises higher educational establishments, scientific and methodological facilities under national, municipal and self-governing bodies in charge of education. The organisation of higher education in Ukraine is built up in accordance with the structure of education of the world's higher developed countries, as is defined by UNESCO and the UN.
Ukraine produces the fourth largest number of post-secondary graduates in Europe, while being ranked seventh in population. Higher education is either state funded or private. Most universities provide subsidised housing for out-of-city students. It is common for libraries to supply required books for all registered students. Ukrainian universities confer two degrees: the bachelor's degree (4 years) and the master's degree (5–6th year), in accordance with the Bologna process. Historically, Specialist degree (usually 5 years) is still also granted; it was the only degree awarded by universities in Soviet times. Ukraine was ranked 66th in 2025 in the Global Innovation Index.

Regional differences
Ukrainian is the dominant language in Western Ukraine and in Central Ukraine, while Russian is the dominant language in the cities of Eastern Ukraine and Southern Ukraine. In the Ukrainian SSR schools, learning Russian was mandatory; in modern Ukraine, schools with Ukrainian as the language of instruction offer classes in Russian and in the other minority languages.
On the Russian language, on Soviet Union and Ukrainian nationalism, opinion in Eastern Ukraine and Southern Ukraine tends to be the exact opposite of those in Western Ukraine; while opinions in Central Ukraine on these topics tend be less extreme.
Similar historical divisions also remain evident at the level of individual social identification. Attitudes toward the most important political issue, relations with Russia, differed strongly between Lviv, identifying more with Ukrainian nationalism and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, and Donetsk, predominantly Russian orientated and favourable to the Soviet era, while in central and southern Ukraine, as well as Kyiv, such divisions were less important and there was less antipathy toward people from other regions.
However, all were united by an overarching Ukrainian identity based on shared economic difficulties, showing that other attitudes are determined more by culture and politics than by demographic differences. Surveys of regional identities in Ukraine have shown that the feeling of belonging to a "Soviet identity" is strongest in the Donbas (about 40%) and the Crimea (about 30%).
During elections voters of Western and Central Ukrainian oblasts (provinces) vote mostly for parties (Our Ukraine, Batkivshchyna) and presidential candidates (Viktor Yuschenko, Yulia Tymoshenko) with a pro-Western and state reform platform, while voters in Southern and Eastern oblasts vote for parties (CPU, Party of Regions) and presidential candidates (Viktor Yanukovych) with a pro-Russian and status quo platform. However, this geographical division is decreasing.

Culture
Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by Orthodox Christianity, the dominant religion in the country. Gender roles also tend to be more traditional, and grandparents play a greater role in bringing up children, than in the West. The culture of Ukraine has also been influenced by its eastern and western neighbours, reflected in its architecture, music and art.
The Communist era had quite a strong effect on the art and writing of Ukraine. In 1932, Stalin made socialist realism state policy in the Soviet Union when he promulgated the decree "On the Reconstruction of Literary and Art Organisations". This greatly stifled creativity. During the 1980s glasnost (openness) was introduced and Soviet artists and writers again became free to express themselves as they wanted.
As of 2023, UNESCO inscribed 8 properties in Ukraine on the World Heritage List. Ukraine is also known for its decorative and folk traditions such as Petrykivka painting, Kosiv ceramics, and Cossack songs. Between February 2022 and March 2023, UNESCO verified the damage to 247 sites, including 107 religious sites, 89 buildings of artistic or historical interest, 19 monuments and 12 libraries. Since January 2023, the historic centre of Odesa has been inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger.
The tradition of the Easter eggs, known as pysanky, has long roots in Ukraine. These eggs were drawn on with wax to create a pattern; then, the dye was applied to give the eggs their pleasant colours, the dye did not affect the previously wax-coated parts of the egg. After the entire egg was dyed, the wax was removed leaving only the colourful pattern. This tradition is thousands of years old, and precedes the arrival of Christianity to Ukraine. In the city of Kolomyia near the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains, the museum of Pysanka was built in 2000 and won a nomination as the monument of modern Ukraine in 2007, part of the Seven Wonders of Ukraine action.
Since 2012, the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine has formed the National Register of Elements of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Ukraine, which consists of 115 items as of September 2025.

Architecture
Ukrainian architecture includes the motifs and styles that are found in structures built in modern Ukraine, and by Ukrainians worldwide. These include initial roots which were established in the state of Kievan Rus'. Following the Christianisation of Kievan Rus', Ukrainian architecture has been influenced by Byzantine architecture. After the Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus', the Galician style continued to develop in the Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia.
After the union with the Tsardom of Russia, architecture in Ukraine began to develop in different directions, with many structures in the larger eastern, Russian-ruled area built in the styles of Russian architecture of that period, whilst the western region of Galicia developed under Polish and Austro-Hungarian architectural influences. Still, a separate Ukrainian Baroque style was developed by the Ukrainian Cossacks in 17th–18th centuries, and Ukrainian Art Nouveau had limited success in the 20th century. Ukrainian national motifs would eventually be used during the period of the Soviet Union and in modern independent Ukraine. However, much of the contemporary architectural skyline of Ukraine is dominated by Soviet-style Khrushchyovkas, or low-cost apartment buildings.

Libraries
The Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine, is the main academic library and main scientific information centre in Ukraine.
During the Russo-Ukrainian war, the Russians bombed the Maksymovych Scientific Library of the Taras Shevchenko Kyiv National University, Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine, the National Scientific Medical Library of Ukraine and the Kyiv City Youth Library.

Literature
Ukrainian literature has origins in Old Church Slavonic writings, which was used as a liturgical and literary language following Christianisation in the 10th and 11th centuries. Other writings from the time include chronicles, the most significant of which was the Primary Chronicle. Literary activity faced a sudden decline after the Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus', before seeing a revival beginning in the 14th century, and was advanced in the 16th century with the invention of the printing press.

The Cossacks established an independent society and popularised a new kind of epic poem, which marked a high point of Ukrainian oral literature. These advances were then set back in the 17th and early 18th centuries, as many Ukrainian authors wrote in Russian or Polish. Nonetheless, by the late 18th century, the modern literary Ukrainian language finally emerged. In 1798, the modern era of the Ukrainian literary tradition began with Ivan Kotliarevsky's publication of Eneida in the Ukrainian vernacular.
By the 1830s, a Ukrainian romantic literature began to develop, and the nation's most renowned cultural figure, romanticist poet-painter Taras Shevchenko emerged. Whereas Ivan Kotliarevsky is considered to be the father of literature in the Ukrainian vernacular; Shevchenko is the father of a national revival.
Then, in 1863, the use of the Ukrainian language in print was effectively prohibited by the Russian Empire. This severely curtailed literary activity in the area, and Ukrainian writers were forced to either publish their works in Russian or release them in Austrian controlled Galicia. The ban was never officially lifted, but it became obsolete after the revolution and the Bolsheviks' coming to power.
Ukrainian literature continued to flourish in the early Soviet years when nearly all literary trends were approved. These policies faced a steep decline in the 1930s, when prominent representatives as well as many others were killed by the NKVD during the Great Purge. In general around 223 writers were repressed by what was known as the Executed Renaissance. These repressions were part of Stalin's implemented policy of socialist realism. The doctrine did not necessarily repress the use of the Ukrainian language, but it required that writers follow a certain style in their works.
Literary freedom grew in the late 1980s and early 1990s alongside the decline and collapse of the USSR and the reestablishment of Ukrainian independence in 1991.

Weaving and embroidery
Artisan textile arts play an important role in Ukrainian culture, especially in Ukrainian wedding traditions. Ukrainian embroidery, weaving and lace-making are used in traditional folk dress and in traditional celebrations. Ukrainian embroidery varies depending on the region of origin and the designs have a long history of motifs, compositions, choice of colours and types of stitches. Use of colour is very important and has roots in Ukrainian folklore. Embroidery motifs found in different parts of Ukraine are preserved in the Rushnyk Museum in Pereiaslav.
National dress is woven and highly decorated. Weaving with handmade looms is still practised in the village of Krupove, situated in Rivne Oblast. The village is the birthplace of two internationally recognised personalities in the scene of national crafts fabrication: Nina Myhailivna and Uliana Petrivna.

Music
Music is a major part of Ukrainian culture, with a long history and many influences. From traditional folk music, to classical and modern rock, Ukraine has produced several internationally recognised musicians including Kirill Karabits, Okean Elzy and Ruslana. Elements from traditional Ukrainian folk music made their way into Western music and even into modern jazz. Ukrainian music sometimes presents a perplexing mix of exotic melismatic singing with chordal harmony. The most striking general characteristic of authentic ethnic Ukrainian folk music is the wide use of minor modes or keys which incorporate augmented second intervals.
During the Baroque period, music had a place of considerable importance in the curriculum of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. Much of the nobility was well versed in music with many Ukrainian Cossack leaders such as (Mazepa, Paliy, Holovatyj, Sirko) being accomplished players of the kobza, bandura or torban.
The first dedicated musical academy was set up in Hlukhiv in 1738 and students were taught to sing and play violin and bandura from manuscripts. As a result, many of the earliest composers and performers within the Russian empire were ethnically Ukrainian, having been born or educated in Hlukhiv or having been closely associated with this music school. Ukrainian classical music differs considerably depending on whether the composer was of Ukrainian ethnicity living in Ukraine, a composer of non-Ukrainian ethnicity who was a citizen of Ukraine, or part of the Ukrainian diaspora.
Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced pop music has been growing in popularity in Ukraine. Folk singer and harmonium player Mariana Sadovska is prominent. Ukrainian pop and folk music arose with the international popularity of groups and performers like Vopli Vidoplyasova, Dakh Daughters, Dakha Brakha, Ivan Dorn and Okean Elzy.

Media
The Ukrainian legal framework on media freedom is deemed "among the most progressive in eastern Europe", although implementation has been uneven. The constitution and laws provide for freedom of speech and press. The main regulatory authority for the broadcast media is the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council of Ukraine (NTRBCU), tasked with licencing media outlets and ensure their compliance with the law.
Kyiv dominates the media sector in Ukraine: National newspapers Den, Dzerkalo Tyzhnia, tabloids, such as The Ukrainian Week or Focus, and television and radio are largely based there, although Lviv is also a significant national media centre. The National News Agency of Ukraine, Ukrinform was founded here in 1918. BBC Ukrainian started its broadcasts in 1992. As of 2022 75% of the population use the internet, and social media is widely used by government and people.
On 10 March 2024, creators of a documentary film 20 Days in Mariupol were awarded with the Oscar in the category "Best Documentary Feature Film", the first Oscar in Ukraine's history.

Cuisine
Ukrainian cuisine has been formed by the nation's tumultuous history, geography, culture and social customs. Chicken is the most consumed type of protein, accounting for about half of the meat intake. It is followed by pork and beef. Vegetables such as potatoes, cabbages, mushrooms and beetroots are widely consumed. Pickled vegetables are considered a delicacy. Salo, which is cured pork fat, is considered the national delicacy. Widely used herbs include dill, parsley, basil, coriander and chives.
Ukraine is often called the "Breadbasket of Europe", and its plentiful grain and cereal resources such as rye and wheat play an important part in its cuisine; essential in making various kinds of bread. Chernozem, the country's black-coloured highly fertile soil, produces some of the world's most flavourful crops.
Popular traditional dishes varenyky (dumplings), nalysnyky (crêpes), kapusnyak (cabbage soup), borscht (sour soup) and holubtsi (cabbage rolls). Among traditional baked goods are decorated korovai and paska (easter bread). Ukrainian specialties also include Chicken Kiev and Kyiv cake. Popular drinks include uzvar (kompot made of dried fruits), ryazhanka, and horilka. Liquor (spirits) are the most consumed type of alcoholic beverage. Alcohol consumption has seen a stark decrease, though by per capita, it remains among the highest in the world.

Sport
Ukraine greatly benefited from the Soviet emphasis on physical education. These policies left Ukraine with hundreds of stadia, swimming pools, gymnasia and many other athletic facilities. The most popular sport is football. The top professional league is the Vyscha Liha ("premier league").
Many Ukrainians also played for the Soviet national football team, most notably Ballon d'Or winners Ihor Belanov and Oleh Blokhin. This award was only presented to one Ukrainian after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Andriy Shevchenko. The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and reached the quarterfinals before losing to eventual champions, Italy.
Ukrainian boxers are amongst the best in the world. Since becoming the undisputed cruiserweight champion in 2018, Oleksandr Usyk has also gone on to win the unified WBA (Super), IBF, WBO and IBO heavyweight titles. This feat made him one of only three boxers to have unified the cruiserweight world titles and become a world heavyweight champion. The brothers Vitali and Wladimir Klitschko are former heavyweight world champions who held multiple world titles throughout their careers. Also hailing from Ukraine is Vasyl Lomachenko, a 2008 and 2012 Olympic gold medalist. He is the unified lightweight world champion who ties the record for winning a world title in the fewest professional fights; three.
Sergey Bubka held the record in the Pole vault from 1993 to 2014; with great strength, speed and gymnastic abilities, he was voted the world's best athlete on several occasions.
Basketball has gained popularity in Ukraine. In 2011, Ukraine was granted a right to organise EuroBasket 2015. Two years later the Ukraine national basketball team finished sixth in EuroBasket 2013 and qualified to FIBA World Cup for the first time in its history. Euroleague participant Budivelnyk Kyiv is the strongest professional basketball club in Ukraine.
Chess is a popular sport in Ukraine. Ruslan Ponomariov is the former world champion. There are about 85 Grandmasters and 198 International Masters in Ukraine. Rugby league is played throughout Ukraine.

See also
Outline of Ukraine

Notes
References
Print sources
Reference books
Recent (since 1991)
History
World War II
External links

Ukraine information from the United States Department of State
Key Development Forecasts for Ukraine from International Futures
Encyclopedia of Ukraine
Government
The President of Ukraine
Government Portal of Ukraine
The Parliament of Ukraine
Economy
World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Ukraine
Ukraine Corruption Profile Archived 3 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine from the Risk & Compliance Portal
Demographics
World population in graphs (until 2100) by the French Institut national d'études démographiques

## Tourism in Ukraine
Tourism in Ukraine attracted more than 20 million foreign citizens every year before the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. Since 2014 this has halved. Visitors come from Europe, Turkey and Israel.
Ukraine offers tourists skiing, hiking, hunting, and fishing opportunities. There are nature reserves, historic churches and castles and other architectural treasures throughout the country. Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi are considered to be Ukraine's principal tourist centres. Other cities are less well known to tourists, such as Odesa. 
The country's tourism industry is underdeveloped, but it does provide crucial support for Ukraine's economy. Since 2005 citizens of European Union and EFTA, United Kingdom, Canada, Japan and South Korea no longer require a visa to visit Ukraine for tourism purposes.

Introduction
Tourism in Ukraine attracted more than 20 million foreign citizens every year before the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. Since 2014 this has lowered to about 10 million tourists. Visitors primarily come from Eastern Europe, but also from Western Europe, Turkey and Israel.
Before the Russo-Ukrainian War, Ukraine occupied 8th place in Europe by the number of tourists visiting, according to the World Tourism Organization rankings. Ukraine has numerous tourist attractions: mountain ranges suitable for skiing, hiking and fishing: the Black Sea coastline as a popular summer destination; nature reserves of different ecosystems; churches, castle ruins and other architectural and park landmarks; various outdoor activity points. Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi were Ukraine's principal tourist centres each offering many historical landmarks as well as formidable hospitality infrastructure. Tourism used to be the mainstay of Crimea's economy, but there was a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014.
The Seven Wonders of Ukraine and Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine are the selection of the most important landmarks of Ukraine, chosen by the general public through an Internet-based vote.
Ukraine is a destination on the crossroads between central and eastern Europe, between north and south. It borders Russia and is not far from Turkey. It has mountain ranges – the Carpathian Mountains suitable for skiing, hiking, fishing and hunting. The coastline on the Black Sea is a popular summer destination for vacationers. Ukraine has vineyards where they produce native wines, ruins of ancient castles, historical parks, Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant churches as well as a few mosques and synagogues. Kyiv, the country's capital city has many unique structures such as Saint Sophia Cathedral and broad boulevards. There are other cities well known to tourists, such as the harbour town Odesa and the old city of Lviv in the west. Most of Western Ukraine, which used to be within the borders of the Republic of Poland before World War II, is a popular destination for Poles. Crimea, a little "continent" of its own, had been a popular vacation destination for tourists for swimming or sun tanning on the Black Sea with its warm climate, rugged mountains, plateaus and ancient ruins, though the tourist trade has been severely affected by Russia's occupation and annexation of the territory in 2014. Cities there include: Sevastopol and Yalta – location of the peace conference at the end of World War II. Visitors can also take cruise tours by ship on the Dnieper River from Kyiv to the Black Sea coastline. Ukrainian cuisine has a long history and offers a wide variety of original dishes.
The country's tourism industry is generally considered to be underdeveloped, but it does provide crucial support for Ukraine's economy. Ukraine does have certain advantages, including much lower costs than other European destinations, as well as visa-free access for most people from Europe, the former Soviet Union, and North America. Since 2005 citizens of European Union and EFTA, United States, Canada, Japan and South Korea no longer require a visa to visit Ukraine for tourism purposes. Additionally, no visa is required from most countries of the former Soviet Union with the exceptions of Russia and Turkmenistan.

Popular tourist city destinations
Central Ukraine
Main cities

Kyiv – the historical capital of Kievan Rus' and modern Ukraine on the Dnieper River. Ancient churches, broad boulevards, beautiful landscapes and a variety of cultural facilities make it a popular destination.
Chernihiv – ancient city of Kievan Rus', one of the oldest cities in Ukraine, has lots of Medieval architecture. Some of the oldest human settlements in Europe have also been discovered in the area.
Pereiaslav – "living museum", one of the biggest historic and ethnographic reserves in Ukraine. There are over 20 different museums, and the city hosts various exhibitions and fairs.
Vinnytsia – the largest city in the historic region of Podillia. Houses the largest floating fountain in Europe, built on the Southern Bug River near Festyvalnyi Isle.
Sumy – city's history started in the mid-17th century.
Uman – known for its arboretum and being the site of Rosh Hashana kibbutz.
Poltava – a common destination for culinary and cultural tourism.
Novhorod-Siverskyi – historic city known for its churches.
Chyhyryn and Baturyn – former capitals of the Cossack Hetmanate with sites of the Cossack era.
Kropyvnytskyi - known for the fortress of St. Elizabeth - one of the few earthen forts from the XVIII century that have survived in Europe, and an architectural heritage in the style of neoclassicism.

Western Ukraine
Lviv – old city in the west of country, with its medieval old town and unique architecture with Polish and Austrian influences. The top tourist destination in Ukraine, when it comes to architecture and culture.
Ivano-Frankivsk – western Ukrainian city that was recognized as the best city to live in Ukraine.
Chernivtsi – the capital of Bukovina offers Balkan atmosphere and fine classical Habsburg architecture in Central-European style, as it was part of Austrian empire (prior to 1918).
Uzhhorod – the capital of Transcarpathia, one of the oldest cities in Ukraine. It attracts tourists because of its proximity to the Carpathian Mountains.
Mukachevo – a major city of Transcarpathia, especially known for its castle.
Kamianets-Podilskyi – a historic city surrounded by the Smotrych River canyon. It is well known for its castle.
Ternopil – a historic city known for its pond.
Lutsk – the post-Mongol capital of Volhynia, known for its castle.
Drohobych – known for its historic centre and the wooden church.
Halych – the Rus'-era capital of Galicia which migrated to the north and developed into a new city from 14th century, forming a historic complex with neighboring villages.
Khotyn – known for its 13th–17th century fortress, the city is a common stop on the Chernivtsi–Kamianets-Podilskyi tourist route.
Pochaiv and Kremenets – neighboring historic cities the sites of which are united under one national historic and architectural reserve. The highlights are Pochaiv Lavra and Saint Ignatius Church accordingly.
Golden Horseshoe of Lviv Oblast – a tourist route which includes various castles in Lviv Oblast, such as Olesko, Pidhirtsi, Zolochiv, Svirzh, and sometimes also Zhovkva, Pomoriany, and Stare Selo castles.

Eastern Ukraine
Kharkiv – city's history started in the mid-17th century, when the Cossacks created the Sloboda settlements; and since then, the city has turned into one of the largest commercial, cultural and educational centers in Ukraine with a population of over 1.7 million people. From December 1919 to June 1934, Kharkiv was the capital of Soviet Ukraine, with Derzhprom being the highlight of the era. The Ukrainian cultural renaissance commenced here in the years 1920–1930.
Sviatohirsk – known for its monastery on hills.
Bakhmut – site of multiple historic buildings until their destruction during the Battle of Bakhmut.
Donetsk
Luhansk

Southern Ukraine
Odesa – a harbor city on the Black Sea with a mixture of different cultures, including Jewish, Armenian, German, Russian and Greek cultures along with the native Ukrainian culture. Odesa is a Black Sea resort and the largest trading center of Ukraine.
Zaporizhzhia – the sixth largest city in Ukraine, famous for Khortytsia Island, DniproHES and Sotsmisto (Socialist city) neighborhood.
Dnipro – the fourth largest city in Ukraine.
Izmail – a historic town on the Danube River in Odesa Oblast of south-western Ukraine.
Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi – one of the oldest cities in Ukraine, dating back to the ancient Greek colony of Tyras.
Sevastopol – a port city known for the ruins of Chersonesos Taurica, an ancient Greek settlement (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Bakhchysarai – the traditional capital of Crimean Tatars, known for its palace and cave town (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Kerch – among the oldest cities in Ukraine, with buildings and structures of ancient Greek, Byzantine, Ottoman, Imperial Russian, and Soviet eras (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Crimean Southern Coast (Crimean Riviera) – the coastline of Yalta and Alushta municipalities which covers many resort towns, especially known for the nature and palaces (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).

Landscapes
Carpathian Mountains – impressive mountain landscapes with skiing and hiking possibilities, spas with cold and hot springs. Ski resorts include Bukovel, Slavsko, Verkhovyna, Vorokhta.
Hoverla – the highest mountain in Ukraine. Hiking.
Azov coast – bathing resorts.
Dnieper – cruises.
Dniester – canoeing, boat sailing.
Southern Bug – rafting, ecotourism.
Shatsk Lakes – bathing, camping, hiking.
Sofiyivka Park, located in Uman.
Waterfalls of Ukraine – ecotourism.

Seven Wonders of Ukraine
The Seven Wonders of Ukraine are the seven historical and cultural monuments of Ukraine, which were chosen in the Seven Wonders of Ukraine contest held in July 2007.

Sofiyivka Park in Uman, Cherkasy Oblast
Kyiv Pechersk Lavra (Monastery of the Caves)
Kamianets-Podilskyi Historical Complex in Kamianets-Podilskyi, Khmelnytskyi Oblast
Khortytsia in Zaporizhzhia, Zaporizhzhia Oblast
Chersonesus in Sevastopol
Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv
Khotyn Fortress in Khotyn, Chernivtsi Oblast

Seven natural wonders of Ukraine
Winners of all Ukraine competition Seven natural wonders of Ukraine:

Askania-Nova near Askania-Nova, Kherson Oblast
Granite-steppe lands of Buh in Mykolaiv Oblast
Dniester Canyon, Dnister
Marble Cave (Crimea)
Podillian Tovtry in Khmelnytskyi Oblast
Lake Svitiaz, part of a group of lakes near Shatsk, Volyn Oblast
Lake Synevyr near village of Synevyrska Poliana in Carpathian Mountains

Recognized World Heritage sites
Kyiv: Saint Sophia Cathedral and Related Monastic Buildings, Kyiv Pechersk Lavra
L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre (Old Town, Pidzamche and St. George's Cathedral)
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans in Chernivtsi
Ancient City of Tauric Chersonese and its Chora in Sevastopol
Segments of the Struve Geodetic Arc (at Staro-Nekrasivka, Baranivka, Felshtyn, and Katerynivka)
Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests in Ukrainian Carpathians, Roztochchia and Satanivska Dacha.
Wooden tserkvas of the Carpathian Region
The Historic Centre of Odesa

Medical tourism
Lately many modern dental clinics with high quality dentistry equipment and high quality materials have been established in Ukraine. They provide patients with high quality dentistry services for prices much cheaper in comparison with Western and Russian clinics. Many tourists from United States, European Union and Russia arrive for dental services, providing a sort of dental tourism.
Other popular sorts of medical tourism in Ukraine are spas, eye and plastic surgery, hair transplants, and mud baths.
Truskavets and Myrhorod are well known for their mineral springs.

Religious tourism
Uman is a pilgrimage site for Breslov Hasidic Jews, especially on Rosh Hashana kibbutz.
Saint Sophia Cathedral and Kyiv Pechersk Lavra in Kyiv are sites of Eastern Orthodox pilgrimage.

Events
Festival culture
In recent years a variety of festivals emerged in major Ukrainian cities. Among the most popular are international jazz festival in Lviv, street food festival in Kyiv, various summer festivals in Odesa—a popular tourist destination in summer. Many of these festivals take place in former industrial buildings of the Soviet era and are thus helping to rejuvenate these areas.

Trade fairs
Governing body of tourist industry and its chairs
Main Directorate of Foreign Tourism (at the Government of the Ukrainian SSR and part of the Soviet Goskominturist)
1964–74 Yosyp Zatyahan
1974–89 Viktor Dobrotvor
Ukrintur Association
1989–93 Volodymyr Skrynnyk
State Committee of Ukraine on tourism
1993–96 Volodymyr Skrynnyk
1997–98 Anatoliy Kasianenko
1998–2000 Valeriy Tsybukh
State Department of Tourism (State Committee of Youth Policy, Sport and Tourism)
2001–02 Anatoliy Matviyenko
State Tourist Administration of Ukraine
2002–05 Valeriy Tsybukh
State Service of Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Culture and Tourism)
2005–06 Ihor Prystavskyi
2006–10 Anatoliy Pakhlya
State Agency of Ukraine on Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Infrastructure)
2011–14 Olena Shapovalova
Department (Directorate) of Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Economic Development and Trade)
2016–17 Ivan Liptuha
2018–2019 Oksana Serdyuk
State Agency for Tourism Development of Ukraine (Ministry of Culture and Information Policy of Ukraine)
2019–present Mariana Oleskiv

Foreign travel statistics
Most visitors arriving in Ukraine were from the following countries of nationality:

Number of foreign citizens visiting Ukraine (from 2014, excluding Crimea)
Statistics are based on data from the State Statistics Agency of Ukraine.

2000: 6.4 million
2001: 9.2 million
2002: 10.5 million
2003: 12.5 million
2004: 15.6 million
2005: 17.6 million
2006: 18.9 million
2007: 23.1 million
2008: 25.4 million
2009: 20.8 million
2010: 21.2 million
2011: 21.4 million
2012: 23.0 million
2013: 24.7 million
2014: 12.7 million
2015: 12.4 million
2016: 13.3 million
2017: 14.2 million

Gallery
See also
References
External links

Official Tourism Portal in Ukraine

## Culture of Ukraine
The culture of Ukraine is composed of the material and spiritual values of the Ukrainian people that have formed throughout the history of Ukraine. Strong family values and religion, alongside the traditions of Ukrainian embroidery and folk music are integral aspects of the country's culture. It is closely intertwined with ethnic studies about ethnic Ukrainians and Ukrainian historiography which is focused on the history of Kyiv and the region around it.

History
Although Ukraine has often struggled to preserve its independence its people have retained their cultural possessions and are proud of their cultural legacy. Ukrainian culture has experienced a notable resurgence since the country gained its independence in 1991.
The earliest evidence of cultural artefacts in region that is now Ukraine can be traced to decorated mammoth tusks in the Neanderthal era. Later, the nomadic tribes of the southern lands of the 4th century BCE, like the Scythians, produced finely worked gold ornaments such as the pectoral found in the Tovsta Mohyla mound.
The modern Ukrainian culture is believed to be formed as a descendant of the ancient state of Kievan Rus' centered in Kyiv as well the Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia, both of which Ukrainians claim as their historical ancestors. The Ukrainian historian Mykhailo Hrushevsky referred to Ukraine as Ukraine-Rus, emphasising Ukraine's historical claim to the ancient state of Kievan Rus'.
Traditional peasant folk art, embroidery and vernacular architecture are critical to Ukrainian culture, and its elements have often been determined by the resources available at the time. The country's strong tradition of folk art and embroidery continues to this day, with Ukrainian embroidery often considered an art form in itself.
Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by the Ukrainian Greek Catholicism, Ruthenian Greek Catholicism and Eastern Orthodox Church and traditions from Slavic mythology.
Prior to the Soviet Union, the Ukrainian culture has had heavy influence from other East Slavic cultures such as Russian and Belarusian culture.
Ukrainian culture has had to overcome numerous obstacles in order to survive and retain its originality, since foreign powers and empires who dominated the country and its people in the past often implemented policies aimed at assimilating the Ukrainian population into their own population, as well as trying to eradicate and purge elements of the culture. For example, the policy of Russification posed significant obstacles to the development of the culture.
Whilst progressing into modernity, Ukraine remains a highly traditional country, where the observance of certain customs and practices play a central role in its culture. Many significant Ukrainian holidays and events are based on the old Julian Calendar and so differ from their Gregorian counterparts. These include Christmas and New Year's Eve, both of which are highly important in Ukrainian culture.
During the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, damage was caused to 1,945 cultural infrastructure objects, according to Ukraine's Ministry of Culture and Information Policy. Cultural institutions that were damaged or destroyed by Russians include cultural clubs, libraries, museums, galleries, theatres, zoos, and art education institutions. It is estimated that rebuilding the damaged sites may take about 10 years.

Folklore
Language
Contemporary politics
Holidays and celebrations
Social gatherings like vechornytsi have a long history in Ukrainian culture, and so do traditional holidays like Ivan Kupala Night, Masliana (Masnytsia), Koliaduvannia, and Malanka, where people gather in large groups.

National symbols
Religion
Religion is practiced throughout the country. Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Eastern Catholicism and Roman Catholicism are the three most widely practiced religions. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church is the largest in the country. Faithful of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, the second largest, practice Byzantine rites, but are in communion with the Roman Catholic Church which means that they are also fully Catholic.

Arts
Clothing, fashion, and jewelry
The iconic embroidered shirt or blouse, the vyshyvanka, is the most recognizable part of Ukrainian national costume, and even has its own public celebration in May. For men, traditional dress also includes kozhukh, kontusz, żupan and sharovary. For women, traditional dress includes kozhushanka, ochipok for married women, and Ukrainian wreath for unmarried girls. Garments are made using elaborate structural design, complicated weaving techniques, extensive embroidery, and cutwork needlework.

Food and drink
Literature
Ukrainian literature had a difficult development because, due to constant foreign domination over Ukrainian territories, there was often a significant difference between the spoken and written language. At times the use of the Ukrainian language was even partly prohibited to be printed. However, foreign rule by Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Turkey, left behind new words thereby enriching Ukrainian. Despite tsarist and Soviet repression, Ukrainian authors were able to produce a rich literary heritage.
Many Ukrainians also contributed to the closely related literature in Russian language.

Performing arts
Dance
Cinema
Theatre
Music
Visual arts
Architecture
Different regions in Ukraine have their own distinctive style of vernacular architecture, based on local traditions and the knowledge handed down through generations. The Museum of Folk Architecture and Way of Life of Central Naddnipryanshchyna is located in Pereiaslav. The open-air museum contains 13 theme museums, 122 examples of national architecture, and over 30,000 historical cultural objects. The Museum of Decorative Finishes is one of the featured museums that preserves the handiwork of decorative architectural applications in Ukrainian architecture. Decorative finishes use ancient traditional design patterns.

Painting, drawing, and sculpture
On special occasions, every aspect of ordinary life is transformed into ornamental art form of artistic expression. Ornamentation and design motifs are steeped in symbolism, religious ritual and meaning. From the illuminated manuscripts of the Peresopnytsia Gospel to the famous pysanky and vytynanky, intricate details have ancient meaning. Much of the oral history was lost during the past 300 years of Russification of Ukraine when Ukrainian culture and language were forbidden. Organizations like the Ivan Honchar Museum, Pysanka Museum and the Ukrainian Museum are dedicated to historic preservation. Different regions of Ukraine have their own traditional ornamentation with their own variation of style and meaning. Examples can be seen in Ukrainian painting (Petrykivka, Kosiv, Opishnia, Bubnivka), ornamental architecture, Ukrainian embroidery, and textile motifs from various Ukrainian historical regions. Some of these works are inscribed in UNESCO and National lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Ukraine.

Photography
Media
Sports
Ukraine greatly benefitted from the Soviet emphasis on physical education, which left Ukraine with hundreds of stadiums, swimming pools, gymnasiums, and many other athletic facilities.
Football is the most popular sport in Ukraine. The top professional league is the Vyscha Liha, also known as the Ukrainian Premier League. The two most successful teams in the Vyscha Liha are rivals FC Dynamo Kyiv and FC Shakhtar Donetsk. Although Shakhtar is the reigning champion of the Vyscha Liha, Dynamo Kyiv has been much more successful historically, winning the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup two times, the UEFA Super Cup once, the USSR Championship a record 13 times, and the Ukrainian Championship a record 12 times; while Shakhtar only won four Ukrainian Championships and one and last UEFA Cup.
Many Ukrainians also played for the USSR national football team, most notably Igor Belanov and Oleg Blokhin, winners of the prestigious Golden Ball Award for the best footballers of the year. This award was only presented to one Ukrainian after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Andriy Shevchenko, the former captain of the Ukraine national football team. The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and reached the quarter-finals before losing to eventual champions, Italy.
Ukrainian brothers Vitaliy Klychko and Volodymyr Klychko have held world heavyweight champion titles in boxing.
Ukraine made its debut at the 1994 Winter Olympics. So far, Ukraine has been much more successful in the Summer Olympics (96 medals in four appearances) than in the Winter Olympics (Five medals in four appearances). Ukraine is currently ranked 35th by the number of gold medals won in the All-time Olympic Games medal count, with every country above it, except for Russia, having more appearances.
Other popular sports in Ukraine include handball, tennis, rugby union, basketball, gymnastics, and ice hockey.

Tourism
Ukraine attracts more than 20 million visitors a year from around the world. Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine and Seven Wonders of Ukraine are popular destinations as well as modern urban cities, festivals, ecotourism, and medical tourism.

See also
List of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Ukraine
Ukrainization
The Seven Wonders of Ukraine are the seven historical and cultural monuments of Ukraine
Ukrainian historical regions
"Slava Ukraini"

References
Sources
Dubrovskiy Visnyk. November 2007. "...I ne pereshkoda letu lita"
Kurkov, Andrey, ed. (2022). Treasures of Ukraine: A Nation's Cultural Heritage. Translated by Jane Bugaeva and Nina Murray. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-02603-8.

## Cuisine of Ukraine
Ukrainian cuisine is the collection of the various cooking traditions of the people of Ukraine, one of the largest and most populous European countries. It is heavily influenced by the rich dark soil (chornozem) from which its ingredients come, and often involves many components. Traditional Ukrainian dishes often experience a complex heating process – "at first they are fried or boiled, and then stewed or baked. This is the most distinctive feature of Ukrainian cuisine".
The national dish of Ukraine is red borscht, a well-known beet soup, of which many varieties exist. However, varenyky (boiled dumplings similar to pierogi) and a type of cabbage roll known as holubtsi are also national favourites, and are a common meal in traditional Ukrainian restaurants. These dishes indicate the regional similarities within Eastern European cuisine.
The cuisine emphasizes the importance of wheat in particular, and grain in general, as the country is often referred to as the "breadbasket of Europe". The majority of Ukrainian dishes descend from ancient peasant dishes based on plentiful grain resources such as rye, as well as staple vegetables such as potato, cabbages, mushrooms and beetroots. Ukrainian dishes incorporate both traditional Slavic techniques as well as other European techniques, a byproduct of years of foreign jurisdiction and influence. As there has been a significant Ukrainian diaspora over several centuries (for example, over a million Canadians have Ukrainian heritage), the cuisine is represented in European countries and those further afield, particularly Argentina, Brazil, and the United States.
During the period of Soviet rule Ukrainian cuisine experienced significant standardization, and the lack of consumer products led to the loss of many authentic recipes or their replacement with simplified variants. The Soviet period also saw the introduction of numerous dishes from other cuisines into the ration of Ukrainians. Following Ukraine's independence, the development of market economy led to the emergence of new trends in the country's cooking practices, such as the spread of industrially-produced convenience foods and development of the restaurant scene. Modern Ukrainian cuisine is characterized by the adoption of new techniques and ingredients, but at the same time preserves many authentic elements.

History
Medieval cuisine of modern-day Ukrainian lands
Slavic tribes, which settled the territory of modern Ukraine during the early Middle Ages, cultivated cereals such as rye, wheat and barley. The main food of the inhabitants of Kyivan Rus' was bread, most commonly made from rye. The Ukrainian word for rye (жито) itself derives from the Slavic verb "to live", which demonstrates the importance of that culture for the historical population of Ukraine. Wheat bread during that era was predominantly consumed by the upper classes. Both leavened and unleavened bread was known in Rus', with the former produced with the addition of hops. Cereal dishes such as kasha, usually made from millet, were common among all groups of the population, and also played a ritual role (koliva). Buckwheat, as well as flax, hemp, melons, watermelons, beets, poppies, oats and peas were also cultivated in Rus' territories.
Another important part of the popular diet during the Rus' period consisted of vegetables, especially cabbage and turnips. A significant portion of harvested vegetables would be salted or pickled to extend their storage period. Other vegetables widespread in Rus' territories were carrots, dill, garlic and lentils. In the 13th century onions were introduced in the territory of modern Ukraine. Wild plants such as sorrel, goosefoot and berries such as raspberry, blackthorn, guelder-rose, brambles, and grapes, as well as mushrooms, were also widely consumed by the population. Grapes were also cultivated for the production of raisins and as a condiment, but they were only available to the upper classes. Nuts were valued for their oil.
To provide themselves with meat products, medieval Eastern Slavs engaged in animal husbandry and hunting. The latter activity was popular among both the noble elite and common people. Rus' people consumed the meat of various mammals and birds such as deer, elk, auroch, roe deer, bison, boar, hare, partridge, grouse, goose, pigeon, swan and crane. Swan meat was considered a delicacy and is mentioned in bylinas stemming from that time. Meat was usually boiled or roasted on an open fire, but with time, frying and braising in fat also became widespread. Different varieties of fish, including pike, carp, sander and common bream constituted another crucial element of the diet in Rus' times. To prolong their shelf life, fish products would normally be salted, smoked or dried. Caviar, especially from sturgeon, was also popular.
Milk products consumed in medieval Rus' included cheese and butter. Milk was also used in some pagan rituals. Colostrum was a popular treat among the population, despite a ban on its consumption introduced by the church. A popular speciality widespread in modern-day Ukraine during the Medieval era was kissel, which was first mentioned in the Laurentian codex under the year 997 as a drink consumed by inhabitants of Belgorod near Kyiv. Among other drinks present in Rus' chronicles are kvass and honey. Desserts such as sweetened bread, prianyky and berries with honey were also known in Ukrainian lands from Rus' times.

Early modern Ukrainian cuisine
According to Ukrainian historian Oleksii Sokyrko, during the era of Polish–Lithuanian rule in the late medieval and early modern times the Ukrainian culinary tradition was developing as part of the general food culture of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. In that period cereals and bread continued to form the base of the diet for most people in Ukraine, but legumes including peas and beans were also widely consumed, particularly in western regions such as Galicia. One of the first documented mentions of borshch, the symbol of modern Ukrainian cuisine, also comes from the times of Polish rule: travelling through Kyiv in 1584, Danzig merchant Martin Gruneweg mentioned the widespread consumption of borshch by the local population; according to him, the dish was cooked in almost every household and consumed daily as both food and drink. Another early mention of borshch in Ukrainian lands comes from Orthodox polemicist Ivan Vyshenskyi from Galicia, who described the dish as a typical peasant food. In the 18th century, after the incorporation of parts of Ukraine into the Russian Empire, borshch became popular at the imperial court in Saint Petersburg. It was also mentioned in Ivan Kotliarevsky's Eneida, the pioneering work of modern Ukrainian literature, on par with halushky, another popular traditional Ukrainian dish.
Ukrainian cuisine was also strongly influenced by Cossack traditions, especially after the establishment of the Cossack Hetmanate in 1648, when Cossack starshyna replaced the old nobility as the new elite in a significant part of Ukrainian lands. Typical food consumed by Zaporozhian Cossacks consisted of milled grains and flour and included traditional Ukrainian dishes such as kasha, kulish, teteria and solomakha. The diet of the Hetmanate's Cossack elite was much more luxurious in comparison: campaigning in the Caucasus in 1726, Lubny colonel Yakiv Markovych ordered his wife in Ukraine to send him foods such as olives, butter, ham, dried beef tongue, chicken and turkeys, as well as olive oil and various appetizers. During the Cossack era beef and game in Ukraine were consumed mostly by the upper classes; the most commonly eaten meat among the lower classes was mutton.

According to a contemporary observation, due to the abundance of fasting days in the Orthodox Christian calendar, the consumption of meat in early 18th-century Ukraine was possible only during one-fourth of days per year. As a result, for most of the time meat products would be replaced with fish, which played an especially important role in the diet of Ukrainian Cossacks and other social groups. In Ivan Kotliarevsky's Eneida, sturgeon, herring and roach are mentioned among the fish consumed by the poem's heroes, who were inspired by Zaporozhian Cossacks. Ukrainian ethnographer Mykola Markevych also mentioned dishes like borshch with fish, loaches with horseradish, and cutlets made of pike or crucian carp, which were all popular among Ukrainian Cossacks. The social elite of the Hetmanate also ate imported fish and seafood such as Dutch herring, eels, flounders, lampreys, salmon, and cuttlefish. Other local fish species popular during that time included carp, catfish, common bream, and sander. Much of the fish consumed by Cossacks in Ukrainian lands was salted or dried. The fish trade between Ukraine and the Black Sea region during the Cossack era was controlled by chumaks, but much of the catch came from local rivers, such as the Dnieper and Desna, and ponds.
Dewberry, fried berries and honey, as well as drinks such as juice, tea, coffee, wine, horilka and prune brandy were mentioned by Zaporozhian Cossack colonel Yakiv Markovych in the early 18th century. Consumption of coffee was a traditional attribute of Ukrainian Cossack starshina. In the 17th century fruit confiture was a favourite treat of the monks of Kyiv Pechersk Lavra, accompanied with coffee. Sweets were traditionally made from locally grown fruit such as quince, apples and apricots. Many desserts also included honey and nuts. A signature product of Kyiv, known since the 18th century, is "dry jam", similar to succade, but with a more tender structure.

18th and 19th centuries
In the 18th century the standard diet of an inhabitant of left-bank Ukraine consisted mostly of dishes made of flour and groats (rye, buckwheat, millet and wheat), as well as borshch and other soups. Common dishes included different types of gruel (solomakha, lemishka, kulish, zubtsi, putria, teteria), halushky, varenyky, flour porridge and noodles. The most important vegetables in the diet of a commoner were beets and onions. Beef and mutton were the most popular meats, followed by pork. A universal product valued for its long storage time was salo (salted lard). Hemp oil was also commonly used in preparation of food.
Potatoes first appeared in Dnieper Ukraine in the mid-18th century. Initially grown predominantly by urban inhabitants, they were gradually introduced into rural areas as well: in 1786 potatoes were cultivated in Chernihiv, Horodnia, Hadiach, Zinkiv and Romny and several surrounding villages; by mid-19th century they were grown in all povits of Kyiv, Chernihiv and Poltava Governorates. In Kyiv alone more than 600 tons of potatoes were harvested on suburban land plots in 1845, but this was still not enough, so the city had to import one cart of potatoes per one inhabitant every year on average. Potato cultivation was most popular in less fertile regions of Northern Ukraine. In the mid-19th century a rich peasant from Chyhyryn area would consume 150 kg of potatoes per year, which superseded the average annual per capita consumption of this product in modern Ukraine. Initially potatoes would be cooked by boiling or baked; potato bread also became a popular product. In his 1860 book ethnographer Mykola Markevych mentioned several traditional dishes including potatoes, which were popular in Left-bank Ukraine, such as fried potatoes with lard, boiled potatoes and mashed potatoes with poppy seeds. In the first half of the 19th century Ukrainians started adding potatoes to soups and ukha. In 1853 the addition of potatoes to borshch was first mentioned in the area of Khorol near Poltava. By the early 20th century varenyky filled with potatoes had become a usual dish in the region of Lubny.

Other parts of Ukrainian ethnic territory also introduced the new culture in their territories. In the 1780s potatoes appeared in the region of Sumy, and by the early 1830s had become a staple food in Sloboda Ukraine, getting mentioned in a story by Ukrainian writer Hryhorii Kvitka-Osnovianenko. Around the same time period potato cultivation became widespread in Transcarpathia. In late-19th century Galicia potatoes were even more popular than in Dnieper Ukraine: in 1888 an average local would consume 310 kg of tubers. Memoirs of Ukrainian publicist Mykhailo Drahomanov mention some common Galician dishes of that time, which included potato soup and kartoplianyky (potato cutlets); the latter could also be consumed with jam as a dessert. In Southern Ukraine potatoes were less popular, as the region's natural environment allowed for more extensive grain cultivation. Among the local population only urban inhabitants and German colonists were known for growing the culture. Potatoes also became an important source for alcohol production in Ukraine.
Another new product introduced in Ukrainian lands during the 17-18th centuries was rice. Initially imported from territories under Ottoman control, in Ukrainian lands that culture was known at that time as "Saracen millet" (Ukrainian: Сарацинське/сорочинське пшоно). Due to its high price, until the mid-19th century rice would be available only to richer strata of the Ukrainian society. In 1768 Zaporozhian Cossack otaman Petro Kalnyshevsky mentioned rice in the list of products stolen from his residence. Recipes with rice widespread during that era included other expensive foods and spices such as almond, saffron, cane sugar, raisins and prunes. Rice served as an ingredient of soups and sweets, as well as a filling for poultry dishes. On Christmas richer families would also use rice for their kutia instead of the more traditional wheat grains. In Ukraine rice remained a luxury product until the Soviet era, when mass cultivation of the cereal started in southern parts of the country (Kherson, Odesa and Crimea).
Among other important cultures which became widespread in Ukraine during the 18th and 19th centuries, enriching its cuisine, were cucumbers and aubergines. The tradition of pickling cucumbers is attributed to Greek merchants, who were provided freedom of taxation and self-government by Ukrainian hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky. The most notable centre of cucumber production in Ukraine has been Nizhyn. After 1787 Nizhyn cucumbers were supplied to the court of Empress Catherine II of Russia, and by 1897 they were exported to 56 countries around the world. Unlike cucumbers, aubergines enjoyed only a limited degree of popularity, being consumed, among others, in the region of Kharkiv, but remaining practically unknown in Galicia.

In the 19th century Ukrainian lands saw the introduction of sunflowers and maize, which form an important part of the popular diet in the country nowadays. Maize cultivation spread to Ukraine from modern-day Moldova and Romania and became most popular in the western region, especially in the Carpathians. Maize porridges such as banosh, kulesha and mamaliga are still characteristic for the cuisine of southwestern Ukraine. Other common cultures which appeared in Ukrainian lands in the 19th and early 20th centuries were tomatoes and bell peppers. The recipe of borshch with tomato paste, which is nowadays standard for many Ukrainian households, became common only in the early 20th century: previously the dish had traditionally been made with fermented beets.
In the late 19th century Ukraine became a centre of industrial production of sunflower oil, which swiftly replaced traditional plant oils, including olive oil, which historically had been imported from Greece. Due to the growth of sugar industry, connected with the names of such families as Tereshchenko, Symyrenko, Yakhnenko, Branicki, Brodsky and Bobrinsky, during the 19th century Ukraine became one of the major centres of sugar beet production.
Another historical Ukrainian speciality, which enjoyed popularity in the 18-19th centuries were plums, which would be dried or pickled in honey. The most well-known centre of plum production in Ukraine was Opishnia, and local produce would be supplied to the tsar's court and exported abroad.
In parallel to the emergence of Ukrainian ethnic cuisine, the 19th century became a period of development for urban gastronomy. Concentration of capital in big cities led to the opening of numerous restaurants and coffee houses offering expensive and exotic dishes both of local and foreign origin, such as oysters, caviar, champagne, pineapples and ice cream.

Modern era
Soviet Union
The Revolution of 1917 and establishment of the Soviet Union had a big impact on the food culture in Ukraine. Following a short period of relative normalization under the New Economic Policy, the years of Holodomor and Second World War radically changed the popular attitude to food among Ukrainians: from now on, dishes acquired a purely utilitarian meaning, and many traditional recipes of national cuisine were revised in order to simplify the process of their preparation. Famine and lack of products in major cities of the Soviet Union led to the introduction of ration stamps, which were rated according to social class, with preference being given to workers. As a result of that system, taste lost its importance as a major criterion, and most people had to suffice themselves with their rations or with goods they cold find in stores. With the exception of NEP era, such attitude to food became standard for the Soviet society.
During the Holodomor famine of 1932–1933, mass confiscation of food by Soviet authorities forced many Ukrainians to consume ersatz foods in order to survive. Popular "dishes" of that time included pancakes made of powdered corn cob and acacia bloom, potato starch, nettle soup, bread baked with the addition of pomace, beets, potato peels, straw, tree bark, grass and other products which could be gathered in the nature. Many starving peasants would be forced to eat snowdrop bulbs and acorns. Even dead animals would be consumed during that time, and in many villages cats, dogs, hedgehogs and even storks and cranes would be hunted down by locals and consumed for their meat. Some would even resort to eating turtles. The break of taboos as a result of the famine eventually led to cases of cannibalism.
Deficit of goods led to the introduction of new products into the popular diet: for example, during the 1930s the government promoted the consumption of soy and rabbit meat, meanwhile during the 1960s citizens were encouraged to eat maize dishes. At the same time, starting from the early 1930s Soviet food industry was revolutionized by the introduction of Western technology, which allowed to start mass production of canned products, mayonnaise, sausages, juices, condensed milk, ice cream and other goods. Bread, which until that time had been usually baked at home, was for the first time produced industrially. 

General standardization of norms led to the introduction of numerous local recipes into the canon of Soviet cuisine, among them Georgian kharcho, Caucasian shashlik and Central Asian plov. Ukrainian cuisine also played a big role in this process. According to a publication of the Soviet Trade Ministry, Ukrainian dishes such as borshch, pampushky, halushky, varenyky and flatbreads, meat products, poultry and sausages, fruit, vegetables and milk products like syrnyky and ryazhanka, as well as fruit and honey drinks, enjoyed great popularity among consumers around the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. During the Soviet period some dishes, for example mlyntsi, were adopted as standard festive foods during holidays such as Masnytsia. At the same time, many traditional Ukrainian recipes, for example fermented cereal dishes like teteria and putria, urda (powdered hempseed), lemishka, varenyky with lard, came out of use under the Soviet rule; since the 1970s, beetroot kvas has been replaced with canned tomatoes or tomato paste as a basic ingredient of borshch.
In order to introduce new culinary approaches, in 1939 Soviet authorities published The Book of Tasty and Healthy Food, which served as an advertisement of new Soviet food industry production and included standardized recipes. The book's publication is considered to have contributed to the rise in popularity of salads, which hadn't been widespread during the Russian imperial era. Salad recipes contained in the first edition included products such as lettuce, romaine and nuts; but as those were unavailable for an average citizen, the second edition from 1952 only included recipes using tomatoes, cucumbers, cabbage and radish. One of the causes for the popularity of salads was the deficit of meat, which became especially acute starting from the 1930s. A popular condiment for salads was mayonnaise, which could also be used to make deviled eggs. Other ingredients for salads which were popular in the Soviet Union included green peas, canned crabs and vinegar. A popular recipe was "winter salad" made from potatoes and carrots, as those products were usually available in Soviet shops. An important part of daily food practices in the Soviet Union was soup. Broth could be prepared from various products, including canned fish and bone, which made that dish available for all Soviet citizens.

Confectionery products in the Soviet Union were generally made of wheat flour. Most recipes included yeast as baking powder. Among popular holiday foods were sprats. Many festive foods were cooked according to own family recipes, but others could derive from standard cookbooks. Popular dishes which spread during the Soviet era and became symbols of Ukrainian cuisine are Chicken Kiev and Kyiv cake.
An important part of Soviet food culture was represented by catering. Most Soviet restaurants cooked food according to the same recipes as those contained in The Book of Tasty and Healthy Food. Local culinary traditions were almost totally ignored, and the same list of standard dishes, such as borshch, chicken Kiev and salad with mayonnaise, could be ordered at restaurants in Kyiv, Leningrad or Tallinn. This could be seen as a continuation of pre-revolutionary trends, in which restaurant cooks in the Russian Empire tended to simplify foreign recipes. The new type of popular cuisine, which appeared during the Soviet era, emulated well-known European dishes, but used totally different ingredients. One example of this trend is the Olivier salad, whose recipe was made more available to the general population by replacing crayfish with carrots, and capers with pickled cucumbers. A peculiar practice in Soviet cuisine was the change of original names of many dishes, as a result of which consommé became known as broth, chicken Kiev - as "butter-filled chicken cutlet", meanwhile Soviet sparkling wines became known as "champagne".
Starting with the introduction of New Economic Policy during the 1920s, Soviet authorities started organizing a network of canteens, which were seen as an instrument of social emancipation of women. Residential buildings designed during that time had the size of their kitchens reduced, as it was believed that home cooking would soon become a thing of the past. Canteens were the most economical places to have a meal, but the quality of food, service and general atmosphere in such establishments were in many cases substandard. Following the Second World War, numerous restaurants, buffets and cafés started appearing in major Soviet cities, including Kyiv; meanwhile canteens were viewed by the broader public with skepticism, and frequently served as gathering places for alcoholics. By the 1960s the image of woman as hostess in popular Soviet culture had been rehabilitated, and eating at home was once again seen as a normal practice. During the 1970s, most Soviet restaurants were located in hotels. Some establishments attempted to diversify their menus by including dishes like schnitzel, but in general the view of food as a source of pleasure was seen as a relic of bourgeois past. Most people visited restaurants only in special cases, for example during birthdays or weddings.

According to restaurateur Yevhen Klopotenko, the Soviet era played a decisive role in the history of Ukrainian cuisine, and as many as 90% of all dishes considered Ukrainian today in fact have Soviet origins. The Soviet regime attempted to create one Soviet nation under its rule, and saw unification of cultural traditions, including cuisine, as one of the ways to achieve that goal. Modern Ukrainian food culture has preserved numerous elements of its Soviet past. Many canteens from that era still operate, offering a standard variety of typical Soviet foods, such as boiled potatoes, vinegret and "Stolichny" salad, and some even continue following the Soviet-introduced tradition of "fish days". Mayonnaise, olivier salad and deviled eggs remain popular festive foods in many Ukrainian families. Other dishes of Soviet origin which are still widespread in modern Ukraine are shuba and mimosa salad. Even some dishes which have their origins in traditional Ukrainian cuisine, for example kholodets, deruny and cutlets had their recipes changed under the Soviet rule. Among the few areas where Soviet cuisine failed to suppress authentic Ukrainian culinary traditions were wake ceremonies and weddings.

Ukrainian diaspora
Mass emigration of Ukrainians to the United States after World War II led to the establishment of Ukrainian cuisine across the ocean. This process saw the fusion between traditional Ukrainian recipes and modern American cooking. Many Ukrainian immigrant families adopted local practices of the new country, organizing picnics and baking turkey for Thanksgiving Day. Nevertheless, typical Ukrainian dishes such as borshch, varenyky, holubtsi and pierogi retained their role as signature dishes among emgrants. An important source on Ukrainian diaspora cuisine is the magazine Nashe Zhyttia ("Our Life"), founded by the Ukrainian National Women's League of America, which was published between 1944 and 2018.

Independent Ukraine
After Ukraine declared independence, Ukrainian culinary traditions started to be influenced by modern global trends, such as the rise in popularity of convenience foods and dehydrated products, for example instant noodles. A popular Ukrainian brand of instant noodles is Mivina, established by Vietnamese businessman Phạm Nhật Vượng in 1995 in Kharkiv. The product became so popular, that eventually all instant noodles in Ukraine started to be known under the brand name. In 2010 the company which had been producing the noodles was bought by Nestlé, which also acquired several other popular Ukrianian food producers such as Svitoch and Torchyn. Due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the production facilities of Mivina had to be moved to Volyn Oblast. The noodles also appeared in Germany, France and Great Britain under the brand Maggi.
Ukrainian cuisine of modern times has witnessed the decline of some traditions, but many authentic elements have been preserved. The use of convenience and ready-made foods has led to a decrease in the number of people who cook at home, however some traditional foods such as korovai are still common during wedding celebrations and other festive occasions. In contrast to Soviet times, kitchen has once again become an important part of private living space for Ukrainian families. Emergence of new cooking technologies such as microwave oven, electric ovens and multicookers led to a rising popularity of simple recipes. At the same time, traditional ovens have disappeared in private houses, but reemerged in restaurants specializing in authentic Ukrainian cuisine.

The fall of the Soviet Union with its lack of competition and directive approach to cooking brought more freedom for cooks, who now have a chance to realize themselves in private business. The development of Ukrainian gastronomy has led to the reemergence of seasonal products, and the taste and outward appearance of food have once again become an important factor. Another trend in modern Ukrainian cuisine is the increase of consumption of meat products, which have become more available to the general population. At the same time, an opposite process can also be observed with an increase in the number of vegetarians.
In the modern world Ukrainian cuisine is associated with a limited number of recipes, such as chicken Kiev or borshch. Numerous restaurants of Ukrainian cuisine are active among the diaspora in countries such as the United States and Canada. Nevertheless, in many parts of the world Ukrainian cuisine is seen through a lens of Russian-imposed narratives, and is represented in a simplified manner with the inclusion of post-Soviet dishes from other nations formerly part of the USSR. In order to form a distinct Ukrainian culinary image in the world, volunteers in cooperation with the Ukrainian Institute have contributed to the publishing of a book on Ukrainian food and its history, which is available online.

Dishes of the cultural heritage of Ukraine
The National Register of Elements of Cultural Heritage of Ukraine includes the following Ukrainian dishes:

Avdiivka kasha – sweet rice porridge cooked with milk, eggs, and butter from Avdiivka;
Borscht – sour soup usually cooked with beetroots;
Buzynnyk – dessert made from elderberries;
Çiberek and yantıq – Crimean Tatar fried turnovers with minced meat;
Christmas prianyky from Slobozhanshchyna – decorated gingerbread cookies;
Et ayaklak – Crimean Karaite pie with meat;
Holubtsi – cabbage rolls;
Hutsul bryndzya – Hutsul sheep cheese;
Lekvar – Transcarpathian sugar-free plum jam;
Milina – Bessarabian cheese pie;
Platsynda – Bessarabian cheese cake;
Psatyr – ritual bread of Pryazovia Greeks;
Sakhnovshchyna korovai – ritual bread from Sakhnovshchyna;
Yavoriv pie – pie with a potato and buckwheat filling from Yavoriv;
Zasypana kapusta – dish made of cabbage and porridge;
Zelekivka zlyvanka – porridge with meat and potatoes from Zelekivka, Luhansk Oblast. The liquid and solid parts of this dish are served separately;
Zozulya – sweet porridge made of millet and poppy seeds.

Soups
Borscht
Although the word borscht usually refers to the red variety, it may also refer to other sour soups that may not have any beets in them.

Chervonyi borshch (red borscht; usually simply called borshch) is a vegetable soup made out of beets, cabbage, potatoes, tomatoes, carrots, onions, garlic, and dill. There are about 30 varieties of Ukrainian borscht. It may include meat or fish. Although the modern variety is usually soured with tomatoes or tomato-derived products (such as tomato paste), traditionally beet kvas was used instead.
Zelenyi borshch (green borscht) or shchavlevyi borshch (sorrel soup): water- or broth-based soup with sorrel and various vegetables, served with chopped hard-boiled egg and sour cream.
Kholodnyi borshch (cold borscht) or kholodnyk: vegetable and beet soup blended with sour dairy (sour cream, soured milk, kefir, or yogurt), served cold with a hard-boiled egg.
Bilyi borshch (white borscht): refers to different soups depending on the region. In southern Podolia, white borscht is cooked with fresh sugar beets, beans, and vegetables. In the Hutsul region, it is cooked with fermented white beets and their liquid (kvas), onions, carrots, sour cream, and Carpathian oregano. In Polesia, it includes sugar beets, beet kvas, cabbage, mushrooms, potatoes and fresh herbs. White borscht may also refer to a żur-like soup from neighboring Poland.
In 2022, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Ukrainian borscht was included in UNESCO's Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in Need of Urgent Safeguarding.

Other soups
Horokhovyi sup: soup made with dried peas and vegetables, often served with pieces of toasted bread.
Hrechanyi sup: soup made with buckwheat, vegetables, and sometimes meat.
Kapusniak: soup made with cabbage, pork, salo, beans, and served with smetana (sour cream).
Rosolnyk: soup with pickled cucumbers.
Solianka: thick, spicy and sour soup made with meat, fish or mushrooms and various vegetables and pickles.
Yushka: clear soup; the most common variety — rybna yushka (fish yushka) is made from various types of fish such as carp, bream, wels catfish, or even ruffe. Another common variety is hrybna yushka (clear mushroom soup).
Zatirka: vegetable or meat soup with dough pellets that are formed by rubbing the dough with two hands.

Salads and appetizers
Brynza or bryndza: white cow or sheep cheese from the Carpathians.
Kovbasa: various kinds of smoked or boiled pork, beef or chicken sausage. One specific variety is krovianka, the blood sausage.
Salo: cured fatback. Usually served sliced, with pieces of bread, onion, and horseradish or hot mustard sauce. It may also be fried (shkvarky) or boiled.
Kaviar or ikra: caviar, served on top of buttered slices of bread.
Kholodets: aspic (studenets) made with meat or fish (zalyvna ryba).
Olivier: salad made out of cooked and chopped potatoes, dill pickles, boiled chopped eggs, cooked and chopped chicken or ham, chopped onions, peas, mixed with mayonnaise.
Vinehret: salad with cooked and shredded beets, sauerkraut, cooked and chopped potatoes, onions, and carrots, sometimes pickles mixed with some sunflower oil and salt.

Bread and grain
Bread and wheat products are important to Ukrainian cuisine. The country has been considered one of the traditional "breadbaskets" of the world. French author Honoré de Balzac claimed to have counted 77 local varieties of bread during his visit to Ukraine in 1848. Decorations on the top of Ukrainian bread loaves can be elaborate for celebrations.

Babka: Easter bread, usually a sweet dough with raisins and other dried fruit. It is usually baked in a tall, cylindrical form.
Bublyk: ring-shaped bread roll made from dough that has been boiled before baking. It is similar to bagel, but usually somewhat bigger and with a wider hole.
Kolach: ring-shaped bread typically served at Christmas and funerals. The dough is braided, often with three strands representing the Holy Trinity. The braid is then shaped into a circle (circle = kolo in Ukrainian) representing the circle of life and family.
Korovai: a round, braided bread, similar to the kolach. It is most often baked for weddings and its top decorated with birds and periwinkle.
Palianytsia: regular baked bread (famously difficult to pronounce for non-Ukrainian speakers).
Savory pampushky: soft, fluffy bread portions, or deep-fried pieces of dough, topped with garlic butter.
Paska: traditional rich pastry baked on Easter.

Main courses
Banush or banosh: a cornmeal stew.
Chicken Kyiv (kotleta po-kyivsky): Kyiv-style chicken cutlet filled with butter and fresh herbs.
Deruny: potato pancakes, usually served with sour cream.
Fish (ryba): fried in egg and flour; cooked in oven with mushrooms, cheese, and lemon; pudding "Baba-sharpanyna"; pickled, dried or smoked variety.
Halushky: a traditional Ukrainian dish made of steam-boiled leavened dough; can serve as an ingredient of soups, or as a separate dish with various fillings; a recipe native to the city of Poltava is halushky served with chicken meat and sour cream.
Holubtsi: cabbage leaves, or sometimes vine leaves (fresh or preserved) rolled with rice or millet filling that may contain meat (minced beef or bacon), baked in oil and caramelized onions and may contain as a baking sauce tomato soup, cream or sour cream, bacon drippings or roasted with bacon strips on top.
Huliash: refers to stew in general, or specifically Zakarpattian variety of Hungarian goulash.
Kasha: porridge, usually made out of buckwheat, wheat, barley, rye, millet, rice, oat, or corn. One specific variety is kasha hrechana zi shkvarkamy (buckwheat cereal with fried pork rinds and onion).
Kartoplianyky: fried balls of potato mash with flour and eggs; may have a filling.
Kotlety or sichenyky (cutlets, meatballs): minced meat or fish mixed with onions, raw eggs, breadcrumbs or bread, and sometimes garlic and milk, fried in oil and sometimes rolled in breadcrumbs.
Kruchenyky or zavyvantsi: pork or beef rolls with various stuffing: mushrooms, onions, eggs, cheese, prunes, sauerkraut, carrots, etc.
Mlyntsi: thin pancakes, similar to French crêpes, Russian bliny, or Ashkenazi Jewish blintz. Stuffed mlyntsi are called nalysnyky, and they are usually filled with quark, meat, cabbage, or fruits, and served with sour cream.
Potato (kartoplia, also dialectally barabolia, bulba, krumplia, mandeburka): young or peeled, served with butter, sour cream, dill; a more exclusive variety includes raw egg. May be boiled, fried, baked, or mashed.
Pyrizhky: baked buns stuffed with different fillings, such as ground meat, liver, eggs, rice, onions, fried cabbage or sauerkraut, quark, cherries etc.
Pyrih: a big pie with various fillings.
Roast meat (pechenia): pork, veal, beef or lamb roast.
Smazhenyna: fried meat.
Stuffed duck or goose with apples.
Varenyky: dumplings made with fillings such as mashed potatoes and fried onions, boiled ground meat and fried onions, liver and fried onions, fried cabbage with fried onions, quark, cherries, and strawberries. Served with sour cream and butter or sugar, when filled with fruits.
Beef Borscht is a hearty soup made with beef, beets, onions, cabbage, carrot and other vegetables.

Desserts
Kutia: traditional Christmas dish, made of poppy seeds, wheat, nuts, honey, and delicacies.
Kyiv cake: creamy dessert consisting of two layers of meringue with hazelnuts and a buttercream filling.
Mandryky: traditional pastry with cottage cheese.
Medivnyk or medovyk: honey cake.
Molozyvo: dish made by baking a beestings and egg mixture.
Sweet pampushky: sweet dough similar to doughnut holes. Frequently tossed with sugar. Traditionally filled with rose preserve, but can also be filled with poppy seed or other sweet fillings.
Pinnyk: berry mousse.
Ptashyne moloko (literally: bird's milk): milk soufflé with chocolate coating.
Smetannyk: soft cake made with sour cream.
Syrnyky: fried quark fritters, sometimes with raisins, served with sour cream, jam (varennia), honey or apple sauce.
Tort: many varieties of layered cakes, from moist to puffy, most typical ones being Kyivskyi, Prazhskyi, and Trufelnyi. They are frequently made without flour, instead using ground walnuts or almonds.
Varennia: a whole fruit preserve made by cooking berries and other fruits in sugar syrup.
Vatrushka: pastry with sweet quark filling.
Verhuny: crispy deep-fried pastry, similar to angel wings.
Zhele (plural and singular): jellied fruits, like cherries, pears, etc.
Zefir: soft dessert made from fruit or berry puree, sugar and egg whites. Similar to meringue.
Yabchanka ― a chilled apple dessert.

Beverages
Alcoholic
Horilka: strong spirit of industrial production or its home-made equivalent – samohon (moonshine) is also popular, including with infusions of fruit, spices, herbs or hot peppers. One of the most exotic is flavoured with honey and red pepper.
Beer (pyvo): the largest producers of beer are Obolon, Lvivske, Chernihivske, Slavutych, Sarmat, and Rogan, which partly export their products.
Wine (vyno): from Europe and Ukraine (particularly from Crimea), mostly sweet. See Ukrainian wine.
Mead (med or medukha): a fermented alcoholic beverage made from honey, water, and yeast. Its flavour depends on the plants frequented by the honeybees, the length of time and method of aging, and the specific strain of yeast used. Its alcohol content will vary from maker to maker depending on the method of production.
Nalyvka: a homemade wine made from cherries, raspberries, gooseberries, bilberries, blackberries, plums, blackthorns or other berries or fruits. Berries were put into a sulija (a big glass bottle), some sugar was added. After the berries fermented, the liquid was separated from the berries, and put into corked bottles. The berries were used to make pyrizhky (baked or fried pastry). The wine has about 15% of alcohol.

Non-alcoholic
Mineral water: well-known brands are Truskavetska, Morshynska, and Myrhorodska. They usually come strongly carbonated.
Kompot: a sweet beverage made of dried or fresh fruits or berries boiled in water.
Uzvar: a specific type of kompot made of dried fruit, usually apples, pears, and/or prunes. Traditionally served on Christmas.
Kysil: a kompot that is thickened with potato starch.
Kvas: a sweet-and-sour sparkling beverage brewed from yeast, sugar, and dried rye bread.
Kefir: milk fermented by both yeast and lactobacillus bacteria, that has a similar taste to yogurt. Homemade kefir may contain a slight amount of alcohol.
Pryazhene moloko: baked milk, a milk product that has a creamy colour and a light caramel flavour. It is made by simmering milk on low heat for at least eight hours.
Ryazhanka: fermented baked milk.
Syta: water with honey.

Regional cuisines
Western Ukraine
Galician cuisine
Culinary experts recognize the existence of a distinct Galician cuisine, which has its roots in the territory between the Carpathian Mountains in the west and Ternopil region in the east. Galician cuisine formed on the base of numerous subethnic groups inhabiting the region, such as Hutsuls, Boykos and Lemkos. Yuriy Vynnychuk considers rural and urban Galician cuisines to be separate phenomena. Taras Voznyak classifies Galician cuisine as part of a broader Central European cuisine. A distinct feature of Galician culinary traditions is the presence of significant Austrian, Italian and Hungarian influences as a result of the territory spending part of its history under Austrian rule. Galician cuisine also influenced the traditions of Polish cuisine. An important source on the history of Galician cuisine is Practical Kitchen by Olha Franko.
Among typical Galician dishes are zhur, knishes, machanka (a thick meat soup of Lemko origin), cabbage, white borshch, banosh, Yavoriv pie, holubtsi, spelt bread, knedle and maslianka. A popular dish of Ternopil Oblast is millet kulesha with cracklings. Popular desserts of Galicia include strudel and cheesecake. An original recipe from Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast are hombovtsi - filled dumplings similar to pierogi leniwe or baozi.

Lviv cuisine
The city of Lviv developed its own culinary tradition, which influenced the cuisines of both Poland and Ukraine. Among its signature dishes are pierogi with potatoes, cheese and onions; veal broth with beans and noodles; chicken broth with farina; kluski made of farina, eggs and greens; yabchanka with cloves; various fruit and berry soups; nut cake. Typical breakfast foods consumed in Lviv are milk coffee, bread and butter, cottage cheese with sour cream. An important part in the diet of Leopolitans has traditionally been played by buckwheat kasha and maize porridge (mamaliga). Among meat dishes historically widespread in Lviv are pork schnitzel, zrazy, roast beef and fried chicken. A traditional Lviv dessert is legumina, washed down with kompot. During the summer period, Leopolitans would also consume many vegetables. A traditional variety of Lviv kutia is prepared with boiled wheat grains, raisins, poppy seed, honey and lemon juice. Historically, Lviv has also been an important centre of beer and wine production.
Lviv's culinary traditions were seriously damaged during the Soviet period, as the new regime declared the city's restaurant and coffeehouse culture to be "bourgeois". Traditional establishments were replaced with canteens, which oriented themselves on workers and peasants, specializing on serving alcohol and juices and offering primitive low-quality food as a supplement. The pre-war tradition of wine consumption was replaced through the introduction of vodka, sweet fortified wines and brandy. Only during the 1970s did quality wines and liqueurs become accessible. This period also saw the reemergence of coffeehouses and establishment of grill bars. Nevertheless, food in cafes and restaurants during Soviet times remained of a lower quality than homemade dishes.

Carpathian cuisines
Traditional dishes of the Boykos include knishes, oshchypky (unleavened bread), mushroom soup, battered peas, machanka and "black pies".
The most important ingredients of Hutsul cuisine are maize, potatoes, beans, mushrooms and bryndza. Traditional Hutsul dishes include banosh (maize flour porridge), huslianka (sour milk), vurda (sheep milk cheese), budz, pancakes and shupenia (a dish made from beans).
A traditional Transcarpathian dish stemming from Hungarian cuisine is bogrács - gulyas meat cooked on an open fire with addition of paprika and various herbs. Another typical speciality of Transcarpathia is zavyvantsi - beef rolls with eggs, pickled cucumber, fatback and potatoes. Some other dishes typical of the region are shovdar - smoked ham and lekvar - plum jam.
A popular speciality in Bukovyna and the broader Carpathian region of Ukraine is mushroom soup with sour cream. Among other traditional dishes in the area are chynakhy (smothered or baked ribs with potatoes, beans and onions), brynza, mamaliga and platsyndy.

Podolian and Volhynian cuisines
Vinnytsia Oblast in the historical region of Podolia is known for the popularity of dishes from Polish cuisine, such as bigos and flaki, which are also widespread in nearby Galicia. In Khmelnytsky Oblast various sausages are popular, including vederey - pork intestine filled with potato. A traditional speciality of the village of Ulaniv are potatoes fried in oil with onion, garlic and other spices.
The region of Volhynia is known for dishes such as mazuryky - turkey sausages filled with butter and cheese. Other popular local dishes are verhuny and zrazy.

Northern Ukraine
Polesia
The region of Polesia (Polissia) covers the northern parts of Ukraine's Volyn, Rivne, Zhytomyr, Kyiv and Chernihiv regions. Its forested and marshy areas contributed to the preservation of archaic culinary practices. An important part in Polesian cuisine is played by products of fishing and gathering, such as berries, mushrooms and grasses. 

The most widespread type of flour in the region is made of rye. Typical Polesian pastries include pies, soft pancakes and various breads, some of which play a role in religious rituals. A traditional local dish is buckwheat varenyky made from rye with addition of sour milk. Another archaic local dish is kvasha, cooked from sour dough. Traditional Polesian festive specialities include borshch, kysil, pancakes with sour cream, cottage cheese with milk, as well as kvasovka - millet porridge with dried fruit.
Many common dishes in Polesia are known under local names, for example tomachi (mashed potatoes), kalamukha (boiled cherries with sour cream and flour), hartanachka (millet porridge with meat and potatoes), bukhty (white flour pastries with raisins and berries), krupnyk (soup with millet, mushrooms and whey). Some other typical specialities of the region are kalatusha - mushroom soup served with flatbreads of pancakes; holubtsi with potatoes and mushrooms; potato babka (makar).
A speciality unique for Rivne and Volyn regions is matsyk, also known as karukh, kirukh, matsiok, kniushok or bohuk. It is prepared from freshly slaughtered meat dried and ripened ripened inside of a canvas bag, pig stomach or bladder.
The Polesian village of Smidyn in Kovel Raion is famous for its baked cabbage, which has been included into the List of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in Ukraine.  

A traditional dish of the territory of Kholmshchyna is volk or voylok, cooked from young leaves of beet, goosefoot or nettle.
A widespread product of Polesian cuisine are blueberries, traditionally consumed with milk, bread and sour cream. Dried blueberries can also be used as an ingredient of other dishes.
In Chernihiv Polesia a popular traditional dish are fried or smothered cucumbers with carrots, onions and meat, known as hurky. Other local dishes of Northern Ukraine include pechenia (pot-baked potatoes, sauerkraut and meat, sometimes with addition of sour cream, paprika, cheese, beans or mushrooms), and pies with guelder-rose filling.
A signature dish of Polesia is deruny - potato pancakes. An international deruny festival takes place every year in the city of Korosten. Another popular Polesian dish is verhuny - crispy oil-fried dough pastries.

Kyiv
A well-known recipe stemming from Kyiv is chicken Kiev, made of battered chicken fillet with a piece of butter, cheese and greens put inside. A traditional variety of borshch cooked in Kyiv includes beef and prunes among its ingredients.

Central Ukraine
A signature dish of Cherkasy Oblast is borshch and pampushky with garlic. Other popular local specialities are varenyky and kruchenyky - meat rolls with a filling of minced meat, pâté, prunes and nuts. In Poltava Oblast a special type of halushky with various fillings is widespread. Another popular dish in the region is pundyky - sweet or savoury dough flatbreads fried on a pan.
A popular dish of Dnieper Ukraine is fish soup (ukha) with a seasoning of salt and garlic.

Southern Ukraine
The cuisine of Southern Ukraine is known for its abundance of seafood. The port city of Odesa is known for its unique culinary tradition. A typical dish widespread in Odesa are gobies, which can be dried or fried in a mix with dough. The latter recipe can also include other fish, such as clupeonella. Another famous local speciality is gefilte fish. In the nearby Mykolaiv region a popular dish is ukha with tomato juice, sour cream and garlic. Common specialities in Kherson are aubergines fried in oil with addition of paprika and apple vinegar, as well as aubergine "caviar" (ikra). A common dish of Jewish cuisine popular in cities of southern-central Ukraine such as Odesa and Dnipro is forshmak - chopped herring served with boiled potatoes, onions and eggs.
Common local dishes of Zaporizhzhia Oblast are kapusniak with pork and thin pancakes with cheese and butter.
Historical populations of Crimea such as Crimean Tatars and Greeks also have their own cuisines. Among the most famous Crimean Tatar dishes are laghman, dolma and chebureks.

Eastern Ukraine
In Sloboda Ukraine borshch is traditionally cooked with the addition of beans and meat frikadellen. A popular second dish is hrechanyky - meatballs with buckwheat.
Common dishes of the Donbas region include baked ham hock and various types of okroshka - a cold soup on the base of kvass, whey or even mineral water, seasoned with sour cream. A signature speciality of Luhansk is a roll made of minced pork and beef, omelette and carrots.

See also
Culinary arts
Mushroom picking in Slavic culture
Twelve-dish Christmas Eve supper

References
Further reading
UCWL Cook Book. Ukrainian Traditional and Favourite Recipes. — Yorkton : The Ukrainian Catholic Women's League, 1970. — 111 p.
Artiukh, Lidia 1977, Ukrainska Narodna Kulinaria [Ukrainian Folk Cuisine], Naukova Dumka, Kyiv
Artiukh, Lidia 2001, Ukrainian Cuisine and Folk Traditions, Baltija-Druk, Kyiv
Barker, Kim (24 May 2025). "In the Midst of War, a Tale of Hot Dogs". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 June 2025.
Corona, Annette 2012, The New Ukrainian Cookbook, Hippocrene Books, New York
Faryna, Natalka (ed.) 1976, Ukrainian Canadiana, Ukrainian Women's Association of Canada, Edmonton
Stechishin, Savella 1959, Traditional Ukrainian Cookery, Trident Press, Winnipeg
Stechishin, Savella 2007, "Traditional Foods" Encyclopedia of Ukraine (Retrieved 2007-08-10)
Tracz, Orysia 2015, First Star I See Tonight, Mazepa Publications Zhuravli, Winnipeg
Ukrainian Food Archived 15 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrainian International Directory Archived 20 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Ukrainian Women's Association of Canada, Daughters of Ukraine Branch 1984, Ukrainian Daughters' Cookbook, Centax of Canada, Winnipeg
Yakovenko, Svitlana 2013, Taste of Ukraine: Rustic Cuisine from the Heart of Ukraine, Sova Books, Sydney
Yakovenko, Svitlana 2016, Ukrainian Christmas Eve Supper: Traditional village recipes for Sviata Vecheria, Sova Books, Sydney (e-format edition)
Ukrainian Traditional Food: Tasty, Fun, with a Twinkle!. — Best Kyiv Guide: March 30, 2020 p.

## List of museums in Ukraine
This is a list of museums in Ukraine. Many of these museums are at risk in 2022 due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. To minimize confusion and inadvertent duplication, alternative translations of museum names are given in parentheses following the primary identification, with street addresses as available.
This list contains details of museums within Crimea, which was annexed by Russia in 2014, and is now administered as part of the Russian Federation.

Cherkasy Oblast
Cherkasy
Cherkasy Archaeological Museum of the Middle Dnipro region – 21 Smilyanska St, Cherkasy
Korsun-Shevchenkiv State Historical and Cultural Reserve – Kotsyubynskoho Island Street, 4, Korsun'-Shevchenkivskyi, Cherkasy
Cherkasy Regional Museum of Local Lore (Cherkasy Museum of Local History) – 1 Slavy St, Cherkasy
Vasyl Symonenko Museum (Literary Memorial Museum) – 251 Khreshchatyk St, Cherkasy
Cherkasy Regional Art Museum – 259 Khreshchatyk St, Cherkasy
Kobzar Museum (Museum of the Kobzar written by Taras Shevchenko, Tsybulsky House) – 37 Baidy Vyshnevetskoho St, Cherkasy
Chyhyryn
Chyhyryn National Historical and Cultural Reserve – 26 Hrushevskoho St. Includes:
Bohdan Khmelnytsky Museum (Bohdan Khmelnytsky Residence) – 26 Hrushevskoho St, Chyhyryn
Three Wells – Subotiv
Subotiv History Museum – 10 Zhovtneva St, Subotiv
19th c. Ukrainian House Museum
Kaniv
Taras Hill – Kaniv
Stetsivka
Cossack Village, (Kozatsʹkyy Khutir) – Stetsivka
Uman
Uman Lore Museum – 31 Zhovtneva Street, Uman
Moshny
Museum of Taras Shevchenko – Kirova St, Moshny

Chernihiv Oblast
Chernihiv
Chernihiv Regional Art Museum – 6 Muzeina St, Chernihiv
Chernihiv Military History Museum – 55A Shevchenka St, Chernihiv
Museum of Ukrainian Antiquities - Shevchenko Street 55 A, Chernihiv
Chernihiv Literary Memorial Museum-Reserve of M. M. Kotsiubynsky – 3 Kotsyubynskoho St, Chernihiv
Leskovitsa History Museum - Tolstoy Street, 23 Chernihiv
Museum of Aviation and Cosmonautics - Streletska Street 4, 23 Chernihiv
Baturyn
Historic and Cultural Reserve - Museum of Hetmancy – 18 Partyzanska St, Baturyn. Oversees:
Baturyn Museum of Archeology – 10 Partyzanska St, Baturyn
Baturyn House of Culture – Partyzanska St, Baturyn
Kochubey House (Judge General Vasyl Kochubey House) – Hetmanska St, Baturyn
Sosnytsya
Literary and Memorial Museum of Aleksander P. Dovzhenka – 2 2th Dovzhenka Ln, Sosnytsya

Chernivtsi Oblast
Chernivtsi
Bukovynian Diaspora Museum – Yosypa Hlavky St, Chernivtsi
Yuriy Fedkovich Literary Memorial Museum – 10 Soborna Square, Chernivtsi
Volodymyr Ivasyuk Memorial Museum – 40/1 Mayakovsky St., Chernivtsi
Museum of Jewish history of Bukovina – 5 Teatralna Square, Chernivtsi
Olga Kobylyanska Literary Memorial Museum – 5 Okunevska St., Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Literary Memorial Museum of Yury Fedkovich – 1B Geroyiv Maydanu St, Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Regional Art Museum  – 10 Tsentralna Square, Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Regional Museum of Folk Architecture and Life – S38B Sichovykh Strilʹtsiv, Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Regional Museum of Local Lore (Chernivtsi Regional Museum) – 28 Kobylyanskoi St, Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Regional Memorial Museum of Volodymyr Ivasyuk – 40/1 Mayakovs'koho St, Chernivtsi
Museum of Aviation and Cosmonautics – 220 Holovna St, Chernivtsi
Chernivtsi Museum of Military History of the Region – 2B Aksenina St, Chernivtsi
Kosiv
Museum Kornelyuk (Ceramics Museum) – T2518, Kosiv
Chortoryya
Ivan Mykolaichuk Manor Museum – Т2601, Chortoryya
Zeleniv
Carpathian Nature Museum – Т2601, Zeleniv

Crimea
Alupka
Vorontsov Palace – 18 Dvortsove Hwy, Alupka
Balaklava
Naval museum complex Balaklava
Feodosia
Aivazovsky National Art Gallery – 2 Gallery St., Feodosia
Feodosia Museum of Antiquities – 11 Aivazovskoho Ave, Feodosia
Museum of Marina and Anastasia Tsvetaeva – 13 Korobkova Blvd, Feodosia
Feodosia Money Museum – 12 Kuybysheva St, Feodosia
Museum of Vera Mukhina  – 1 Fedka St, Feodosia
Livadiya
Livadia Palace – 44A Baturyna St, Livadiya
Simferopol
Larisa Borisovna Museum of the History of the City of Simferopol – 17 Pushkina St, Simferopol
Simferopol Art Museum  – 35 Karla Libknekhta St,.Simferopol
Sevastopol
Mikhail Kroshitsky Sevastopol Art Museum – 9 Nakhimova Ave, Sevastopol
Yalta
White Dacha  (A.P. House-Museum Chekhov) – 112 Kirova St, Yalta

Dnipropetrovsk Oblast
Dnipro
Dnipropetrovsk Art Museum – 21 Shevchenka St, Dnipro
House-Museum of Dmytro Yavornytsky – 5 Taras Shevchenko St, Dnipro
Museum of Ukrainian Painting – 5A Troitska Square, Dnipro
Dmytro Yavornytsky National Historical Museum of Dnipro – 16 Dmytra Yavornytskoho Ave, Dnipro
Kryvyi Rih
Mining Machines Museum – Marshaka St, Kryvyi Rih
Michael Marmer Museum Center of Jewish Culture and History of the Shoah – 46 Pushkina St, Kryvyi Rih
Kryvyi Rih Historical and Local History Museum – 16A Kaunaska St, Kryvyi Rih

Donetsk Oblast
Donetsk
Donetsk Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Donetsk Museum of Local History) – 189B Chelyuskintsiv St, Donetsk
Druzhkivka
Druzhkovka Art Museum – 112 Enhelsa St, 112, Druzhkivka
Horlivka
Horlivka Art Museum – 23 Pushkinska St, Horlivka
Horlivka Museum of Miniature Books – 57 Peremohy Ave, Horlivkaorsk
Kramatorsk
Kramatorsk Art Museum – 60 Akademichna St, Kramatorsk
Makiivka
Makyvsky Museum of Local Lore  (Makyvsky Museum of Local History) – 51/26 Lenina Ave, Makiivka
Mariupol
Arkhip Kuindzhi Art Museum (Kuindzhi Center for Contemporary Art and Culture) – 58 Heorhiivska St, Mariupol (destroyed by Russian shelling March 21, 2022)
Museum of Natural History – 5 Teatralna St, Mariupol
Mariupol Regional Museum of Local Lore (Mariupol Museum of Local History) – 20 Heorhiivska St, Mariupol. Oversees
Museum of Folk Life – 55 Heorhiivska St, Mariupol
Museum of the History and Ethnography of the Greeks of the Azov Sea Region – 37A Henerala Kurkchy St, Sartana

Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast
Ivano-Frankivsk
Art Museum of Prykarpattia (Ivano-Frankivsk Regional Art Museum) – 8 Maydan Sheptytsʹkoho, Ivano-Frankivsk
Ratusha, Ivano-Frankivsk – Rynok Square, Ivano-Frankivsk
Kryvorivnya
Literary-Memorial Museum Franko – Р24, Kryvorivnya
Kosiv
Museum of Liberation Struggles of the Carpathian Region – Nezalezhnosti St, Kosiv
Kolomyya
National Museum of Hutsulshchyna and Pokuttia Folk Art – 25 Teatralna St, Kolomyya. Oversees:
Kosiv Museum of Hutsulshchyna Folk Art and Life – 55 Nezalezhnosti St, Kosiv
Pysanka Museum – 43B Vyacheslav Chornovil Ave, Kolomyya
Museum of Ethnography and Ecology of the Carpathians – 269 Svobody St, Yaremche
Verkhovyna
House-Museum of the film "Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors," – Verkhovyna
Hutsul Museum – Р24, Verkhovyna
Roman Kumlyk Museum of Musical Instruments – Verkhovyna
Yabluniv
Museum "Wooden Sculpture" (Museum Igor Fartushny) – Yabluniv
Yaremche
Park-Museum "Carpathians in miniature" – Yaremche

Kharkiv Oblast
Kharkiv
M. F. Sumtsov Kharkiv Historical Museum – 5 Universytetska St, Kharkiv
Kharkiv Art Museum (shelled by Russian missiles March, 2022) – 11 Zhon Myronosyts St, Kharkiv

Kherson Oblast
Kherson
Kherson Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Kherson Museum of Local History) – 9 Soborna St, Kherson
Oleksiy Shovkunenko Kherson Regional Art Museum (Kherson Art Museum) – 34 Soborna St, Kherson (looted by Russian troops November 2022)

Khmelnytskyi Oblast
Kamianets-Podilskyi
Kamianets-Podilskyi Castle – 1 Zamkowa St, Kamyanets-Podilskyi
Kamianets-Podilskyi State Historical Museum-Reserve – 1 Ioanno-Predtechynska St,  Kamyanets-Podilskyi
Khmelnytski Oblast Art Museum – 11 Piatnytska St, Kamyanets-Podilskyi
Miniature Museum of Ukrainian Castles – Kamyanets-Podilskyi
Shepetivka
Khmelnytskyi Regional Literary-Memorial Museum M. Ostrovsky – 2 Ostrovskoho St, Shepetivka

Kirovohrad Oblast
Kropyvnytskyi
Alexander Alexandrovich Osmorkin Art Memorial Museum – 89 Teatralna St, Kropyvnytskyi
Kirovohrad Regional Art Museum – 60 Bolshaya Perspektivnaya St, Kropyvnytskyi
Korlyuhivka
Khutir Nadia ("Village of Hope" Ivan Karpenko-Karyi State Museum-Reserve, Tobilevich) – Korlyuhivka On the grounds:
Museum of Choreographic Art
Znamianka - Znamianka Local History Museum
Pobuzke
Strategic missile forces museum in Ukraine – Pobuzke

Kyiv
Ukraine State Aviation Museum (Oleg Antonov State Aviation Museum) – 1 Medova St
L.I. Bodnarchuk Museum of Beekeeping (Ukraine National Beekeeping Museum) – 19 Akademika Zabolotnoho St
Holodomor Genocide Museum – 3 Lavrska St
National Folk Decorative Art Museum – 5 Lavrska Street, building 29
Museum of Books and Publishing of Ukraine – 9 Lavrska St building 9/10
National Museum of Ukrainian Folk Decorative Art – 9 Lavrska St
Museum of Theater, Music and Cinema of Ukraine – 9 Lavrska St, building 26
Ukrainian Treasures Museum – 9 Lavrska St
Mykola Siadrystyi Micro Miniatures Museum – 9 Lavrska St
Mystetskyi Arsenal National Art and Culture Museum Complex (Mystetskyi Arsenal) – 10-12 Lavrska St
Ivan Honchar Museum (National Center of Folk Culture) – 19 Lavrska St
Museum of The History of Ukraine in World War II – 27 Lavrska St
Mikhail Bulgakov Museum (Literature-Memorial Museum to Mikhail Bulgakov) – 13А Andriivs'kyi descent
Ukrainian National Chernobyl Museum – 1 Provulok Khoryva
Kyiv Museum of Electric Transportation
Kyiv Fortress – 24А Vulytsya Hospitalna
Mykhailo Hrushevsky Memorial Museum – 9 Pankivska St
Mamayeva Sloboda (Cossack Village) – 2 Mykhaila Dontsya St
Kyiv Metro Museum – 35 Peremohy Ave
Museum of Modern Art of Ukraine – 41 Kyrylivska St
National Art Museum of Ukraine – 6 Mykhaila Hrushevskoho St
Museum of Kyiv Life in the First Half of the 19th Century (formerly Kyiv Museum of Alexander Pushkin) – 9 Vulytsya Kudryavska
Kyiv Railway Museum – 4 Heorhiia Kirpy St
Maxym Rylsky Museum – 7 Maksyma Ryl's'koho St
Museum of Western and Oriental Art (Bogdan and Varvara Khanenko Museum of Art) – 15 Tereshchenkivska St
Pinchuk Art Centre – St. Velyka Vasylkivska, 1 Baseina St
Pyrohovo Open Air Museum (National Museum of Folk Architecture and Life of Ukraine) –  Akademika Tronʹka St
Shcherbenko Art Centre – 22B Mykhailivska St
Toilet History Museum  – 22 Rybalska St
Pavlo Tychyna Museum – 5 Tereshchenkivska St
National Museum of the History of Ukraine – 2 Volodymyrs'ka St
National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War
National Museum-Preserve of Ukrainian military achievements
Museum of Outstanding Figures of Ukrainian Culture – 97 Saksahanskoho St.
Museum of Water – 1В, Mykhaila Hrushevskoho St
Maria Zankovetska Museum – 121 Velyka Vasylkivska St

Kyiv Oblast
Ivankiv
Ivankiv District Historical and Local History Museum – 15 Shevchenka St, Ivankiv
Pereiaslav
Museum of Ancient Architecture Pereyasliv – 34 Mykhaila Sikorskoho St, Pereiaslav
Museum-Diorama "Battle for the Dnipro in the Pereyaslava District in Autumn 1943" – Pereiaslav
Museum of Folk Life and Architecture of Middle Naddnipryanshyna – 61 Litopysna St, Pereiaslav. Includes:
Museum of Space Exploration – Pereiaslav
Nikolay Benardos Museum – Pereiaslav
Museum of the Cossack Pledge – Pereiaslav
Museum of the Postal Station – Pereiaslav
Museum of the Ukrainian Ryschuk Embroidered Towel – Pereiaslav
Museum of Kobzar Art – 20 Bohdana Khmel'nyts'koho St, Pereiaslav
Trypillia Culture Museum – 10 Shevchenka St, Pereiaslav
H.S. Skovoroda Memorial Museum – 52 Skovorody St, Pereiaslav
Trypillya
Kyiv Regional Archeological Museum – 12 Vulytsya Heroyiv Trypillya, Trypillya
Novi Petrivtsi
Mezhyhirya Residence (Former Viktor Yanukovych Estate) – Novi Petrivtsi

Luhansk Oblast
Luhansk
Aviation Technical Museum – Luhansk
Luhansk Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Luhansk Museum of Local History) – 30 Karla Marksa St, Luhansk

Lviv Oblast
Brody
Brody Museum of History and District Ethnography – 5 Svoboda Square, Brody
Drohobych
Drohobych Museum of Local Lore (Drohobych Museum of Local History) – 38 Taras Shevchenko St, Drohobych
Lviv
Lviv Arsenal
Korniakt Palace
Borys Voznytsky Lviv National Art Gallery. Oversees
Lozinsky Palace – the main building, on 3 Stefanyka street
Potocki Palace – 15 Kopernyka street
Boim Chapel – 1 Katedralna Square
Museum of Ancient Ukrainian Books – 15a Kopernyka street, near Potocki Palace
Rusalka Dnistrova Museum –  40 Kopernyka street
Church of St. John the Baptist – 1 Pidhirna street
Johann Georg Pinsel Museum – 2 Mytna street
Memorial Museum-workshop of Teodozia Bryzh – 5 Martovycha street
Mykhailo Dzyndra Museum of Modern Sculpture – 16 Muzeyna street, Briukhovychi
Olesko Castle – Olesko
Pidhirtsi Castle – Pidhirtsi
Markiyan Shashkevych Memorial Museum – Pidlyssia, Zolochiv Raion.
Zolochiv Castle Memorial Museum – Zolochiv
Hetman Ivan Vyhovsky Museum –  Ruda, Stryi Raion.
Pyatychanska Tower – Pyatychany, Zhydachiv Raion
Museum of Zhydachiv Land – Zhydachiv.
Andrey Sheptytsky National Museum of Lviv
Pharmacy Museum, Lviv
Zolochiv
Zolochiv Castle  – Ternopilska St, Zolochiv

Mykolaiv Oblast
Berezanka
Berezanka District Folk History Museum 70 Lenin St, Berezanka
Mykolaiv
Mykolaiv Regional Museum of Local History – 29 Naberezhna St, Mykolaiv
V. V. Vereshchagin Mykolaiv Art Museum –  29 Naberezhna St, Mykolaiv
Mykolaiv Museum of Shipbuilding and Fleet –  4 Admiralska St, 4, Mykolaiv
Museum of Partisan Movement in Mykolaiv in the Great Patriotic War of 1941-1944 –  5 Lyahina St, Mykolaiv
Ochakiv
R. G. Sudkovsky Museum of Marine Painting  – 13 Starofortechna St, Ochakiv

Odesa Oblast
Odesa
Catacomb of Kantakuzena – 7 Bunina St, Odesa
F. P. De Volana Museum of Odesa Maritime Trade – 1 Lanzheronivsky Descent, Odesa
O. Bleschunov Museum of Private Collections – 19 Polska St, Odesa
Museum of the Cinema – 33 Frantsuzky Blvd, Odesa
Museum of Contraband – 6 Katerynynska St, Odesa
Museum of Filiki Eteriya – 18 Chervonyi Ln, Odesa
Museum-Apartment of Leonid Utyosov – Utosova St, 11, Odesa
Museum of the History of Jews in Odesa "Migdal-Shorashim" (Jewish Museum of Odesa) – 66 Nizhynska St, Odesa
Museum of Interesting Science – 4E Shevchenka Ave, Odesa
Museum of Modern Art of Odesa – 5 Leontovycha St, Odesa
Odesa Archeological Museum – 4 Lanzheronivska St, Odesa
Odesa Brick Museum – 58 Novoselskogo, Odesa
Odesa Regional Museum of Local Lore (Odesa Museum of Local History) – 4 Havanna St, Odesa
Odesa Literature Museum – 2 Lanzheronivska St, Odesa
Odesa National Art Museum – Potocki Palace, 5a Sofiyska, Odesa
Odesa Museum of Western and Eastern Art – 9 Pushkinska St, Odesa
Odesa Numismatics Museum –  33 Hretska Street, Odesa
Odesa Pushkin Museum –  13 Pushkinska St, Odesa
N.L. Shustov Cognac Museum – 13 Melnytska St, Odesa

Poltava Oblast
Poltava
Volodimir Korolenka Literary Memorial Museum – 1 Korolenka St, Poltava
Estate of Ivan Kotlyarevskyi Museum – 3 Sobornyi Square, Poltava
Vasyl Krychevsky Poltava Local History Museum (Poltava Local Lore Museum) – 2 Konstytutsii St, Poltava
Anton S. Makarenko Museum-Reserve – 1-2 Muzey Makarenka St, Kovalivka
Museum of Military Conflicts of the Twentieth Century – 5 Parkova St, Poltava
Panas Myrnoho Literary Memorial Museum – 56 Panasa Myrnoho St, Poltava
Poltava Art Museum – 5 Yevropeiska St, Poltava
Poltava Museum of Aviation and Aerospace – 16 Pershotravnevyi Ave, Poltava
Poltava Museum of Long-range Strategic Aviation – 1 Oleksandra Zasyadka Street, Poltava
Opishnya
National Museum-Reserve of Ukrainian Pottery – 102 Partyzanska St, Opishnya
Museum-manor of the Poshivayl family – Zalyvchoho St, Opishnya
Museum-Estate Alexandra Selyuchenko – 29 Hubarya St, Opishnya

Rivne Oblast
Kostopil
Forest Museum – Р05, Kostopil
Kostopil Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Kostopil Museum of Local History) – 16 Hrushevskoho St, Kostopil
Ostroh
Ostroh Castle – Ostroh
Peresopnytsya
Derevyana Fortress Museum – Peresopnytsya
Rivne
Amber Museum – 17 Symona Petlyury St, Rivne
Rivne Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Rivne Museum of Local History) – 19 Drahomanova St, Rivne

Sumy Oblast
Bilopillya
Anton S. Makarenko Museum –  Staroputivlska St, Bilopillya
Lebedyn
B.K. Rudneva Municipal Art Museum of Lebedyn – 17 Voli Square, Lebedyn
Lebedyn Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Lebedyn Museum of Local History) – 37 Taras Shevchenka St, Lebedyn
Sumy
Museum of Banking history in the Sumy oblast and the History of Ukrainian Money – 9/1 Pokrovska St, Sumy
Sumy Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Sumy Museum of Local History) – 2 Herasima Kondratieva St, Sumy
Nikanor Onatsky Regional Art Museum in Sumy – 1 Pokrovskaya Square, Sumy

Ternopil Oblast
Berezhany
Berezhany Book Museum – 1 Rynok Square, 1, Berezhany
Buchach
Buchach Museum of Local Lore – 55 Halytska St, Buchach
Monastyryska
Museum of Lemko Culture and Life – 59 Taras Shevchenko St, Monastyryska
Staryi Skalat
Lesya Kurbasa Memorial Museum-Estate – Staryi Skalat
Ternopil
Memorial Museum for Political Prisoners – 1 Kopernyka St, Ternopil
Ternopil Regional Museum of Local Lore  (Ternopil Museum of Local History) – 3 Euromaidan Heroes Square, Ternopil
Ternopil Regional Art Museum – 1 Solomii Krushelnytskoi St, Ternopil
Ternopil Castle – 12 Zamkova St, Ternopil
Zbarazh
Zbarazh Castle (Zbarazh Local History Museum) – Zbarazh

Vinnytsia Oblast
Stryzhavka
Werwolf Museum and Historical Construction – Turystychna, Stryzhavka
Tymanivka
Suvorov Museum – Т0222, Tymanivka
Vinnytsia
Museum of Retro Technology (Museum Avtomotovelofototeleradio) – 1 Soborna St, Vinnytsia
Vinnytsia Local History Museum (Regional Museum of Local Lore) – 19 Soborna St, Vinnytsia
Vinnytsia Regional Museum of Art – 21 Soborna St, Vinnytsia
Museum of Transport Models – 24 Soborna St, Vinnytsia
Jacob Balabana Museum of the Ukrainian Stamp – 26-28 Soborna St, Vinnytsia
Museum-Manor of M. Kotsyubynskyi – 15 Ivana Bevza St, Vinnytsia
National Pirogov's Estate Museum – 155 Pyrohova St, Vinnytsia
Science Museum – 51 Mykoly Ovodova St, Vinnytsia

Volyn Oblast
Kolodyazhne
Museum of Lesya Ukrainkat – 53 Lesi Ukrayinky St,
Lutsk
Museum of Bells – Vladycha Tower, 1а Kafedralna St, Lutsk
Museum of Ukrainian Troops and Military Equipment – 4 Na Taboryshchi St, Lutsk
Korsak Art Museum – 1 Karbysheva St, Lutsk
Museum of the Volyn Icon – 5 Yaroshchuka St, Lutsk
Volyn Regional Historical Museum – 20 Shopena St, Lutsk
Rokyni
Museum of the History of Agriculture in Volyn – 1 Shkilna, Rokyni
Volodymyr
Volodymyr-Volynsky Historical Museum (O. M. Dvernytskyi Volodymyr Historical Museum) – 6 Ivana Franka St, Volodymyr

Zakarpattia Oblast
Berehove
Museum of Berehivshchyna – Palats Hrafa Habora Betlena, 1Gabora Betlena St, Berehove
Karpaty
Shenbornov Palace (Palace of Counts Schönborn) – Е50, Karpaty
Mukachevo
Palanok Castle –  Zamkova Gora Street, Mukachevo
Uzhhorod
Transcarpathian Regional Art Museum of Joseph Bokshay – 3 Zhupanatska Square, Uzhhorod
Uzhhorod Museum of Folk Architecture and Life – 33A Kapitulna St, Uzhhorod
Uzhhorod Сastle (Tyvodar Lehotsky Transcarpathian Museum of Regional History) – 33 Kapitulna St, Uzhhorod
Zoological Museum of Uzhhorod State University – 54 Voloshyna St, Uzhhorod

Zaporizhzhia Oblast
Melitopol
Melitopol Museum of Local Lore (Melitopol Museum of Local History) – 18 Mykhaila Hrushevskoho St, Melitopol
Vasylivka
Popov Manor House (Vasylivka Historical and Architectural Museum-Reserve) – 12 Haharina St, Vasylivka
Vilnyansk
Vilnyansk Museum of Local Lore (Vilnyansk Museum of Local History) – Vilnyansk
Zaporizhzhia
Khortytsia – Zaporizhzhia Oversees:
Historical and Cultural Complex Zaporizhian Sich (Zaporizhian Cossack Museum) – 10 Ctary Redyt St, Zaporizhzhia
Khortytsa Island Museum – 164 H08, Zaporizhzhia
Zaporizhzhia Regional Art Museum – 76B Nezalezhnoi Ukrainy St, Zaporizhzhia
Zaporizhzhia Regional Museum of Local Lore (Zaporizhzhia Museum of Local History) – 29/16 Troitska St, Zaporizhzhia
Faeton Museum – 8 Vyborz'ka St, Zaporizhzhia
Museum of High Voltage Equipment – 1 Dniprovske Hwy, Zaporizhzhia
Museum of the History of Weapons – 189 Sobornyi Ave, Zaporizhzhia

Zhytomyr Oblast
Radomyshl
Radomysl Castle – 15 Pletenetska St, Radomyshl. Oversees:
Museum of Ukrainian Home Icons
Zhytomyr
Literary and Memorial Museum of V. G. Korolenko – 1 Korolenka Square, Zhytomyr
Zhytomyr Region History Museum – 1 Zamkova Square, Zhytomyr
Sergei Pavlovich Korolyov Museum of Cosmonautics
Ukrainian Culture House – 61 Velyka Berdychivska St, Zhytomyr

See also

Lists of museums
Tourism in Ukraine
Culture of Ukraine
List of art museums and galleries in Ukraine


== References ==