--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Ecuador
FILE_NAME: country_ecuador.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:45:19
----------------

# Ecuador

## General Overview
Ecuador, officially the Republic of Ecuador, is a country in northwestern South America, bordered by Colombia on the north, Peru on the east and south, and the Pacific Ocean on the west. It also includes the Galápagos Province which contains the Galápagos Islands in the Pacific, about 1,000 kilometers (540 nmi; 620 mi) west of the mainland. The country's capital is Quito, and the largest city is Guayaquil.
The land that comprises modern-day Ecuador was once home to several groups of indigenous peoples that were gradually incorporated into the Inca Empire during the 15th century. The territory was colonized by the Spanish Empire during the 16th century, achieving independence in 1820 as part of Gran Colombia, from which it emerged as a sovereign state in 1830. The legacy of both empires is reflected in Ecuador's ethnically diverse population, with most of its 17.8 million people being mestizos, followed by large minorities of Europeans, Native American, African, and Asian descendants. Spanish is the official language spoken by a majority of the population, although 13 native languages are also recognized, including Quechua and Shuar.
Ecuador is a plurinational representative democratic presidential republic and a developing country whose economy is highly dependent on exports of commodities, primarily petroleum and agricultural products. The country is a founding member of the United Nations, Organization of American States, Mercosur, PROSUR, and the Non-Aligned Movement. According to the Center for Economic and Policy Research, between 2006 and 2016, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 22.5% and annual per capita GDP growth was 1.5 percent (as compared to 0.6 percent over the prior two decades). At the same time, the country's Gini index of economic inequality improved from 0.55 to 0.47.
One of 17 megadiverse countries in the world, Ecuador hosts many endemic plants and animals, such as those of the Galápagos Islands. In recognition of its unique ecological heritage, the new constitution of 2008 is the first in the world to recognize legally enforceable rights of nature.
In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Ecuador ranks 58th out of 127 countries with a score of 11.6, which indicates a moderate level of hunger. In 2026 the United Nations reported that 2.6 million people in Ecuador are facing acute hunger amid an unprecedented crisis.

Etymology
The country's name means literally "Equator" in the Spanish language, truncated from the Spanish official name, República del Ecuador (lit. "Republic of the Equator"), derived from the former Ecuador Department of Gran Colombia established in 1824 as a division of the former territory of the Royal Audience of Quito. Quito, which remained the capital of the department and republic, is located on the equator.

History
Pre-Inca era
Various peoples had settled in the area of future Ecuador before the arrival of the Incas. The archeological evidence suggests that the Paleo-Indians' first dispersal into the Americas occurred near the end of the last glacial period, around 16,500–13,000 years ago. The first people who reached Ecuador may have journeyed by land from North and Central America or by boat down the Pacific Ocean coastline.
Even though their languages were unrelated, these groups developed similar groups of cultures, each based in different environments. The people of the coast combined agriculture with fishing, hunting, and gathering; the people of the highland Andes developed a sedentary agricultural way of life; and peoples of the Amazon basin relied on hunting and gathering; in some cases, this is combined with agriculture and arboriculture.
Many civilizations arose in Ecuador, such as the Valdivia Culture and Machalilla Culture on the coast, the Quitus (near present-day Quito), and the Cañari (near present-day Cuenca).
In the highland Andes mountains, where life was more sedentary, groups of tribes cooperated and formed villages; thus the first nations based on agricultural resources and the domestication of animals formed. Eventually, through wars and marriage alliances of their leaders, groups of nations formed confederations.
When the Incas arrived, they found that these confederations were so developed that it took the Incas two generations of rulers—Topa Inca Yupanqui and Huayna Capac—to absorb them into the Inca Empire. People belonging to the confederations that gave them the most problems were deported to distant areas of Peru, Bolivia, and north Argentina. Similarly, a number of loyal Inca subjects from Peru and Bolivia were brought to Ecuador to prevent rebellion. Thus, the region of highland Ecuador became part of the Inca Empire in 1463 sharing the same language.
In contrast, when the Incas made incursions into coastal Ecuador and the eastern Amazon jungles of Ecuador, they found both the environment and indigenous people more hostile. Moreover, when the Incas tried to subdue them, these indigenous people withdrew to the interior and resorted to guerrilla tactics. As a result, Inca expansion into the Amazon Basin and the Pacific coast of Ecuador was hampered. The indigenous people of the Amazon jungle and coastal Ecuador remained relatively autonomous until the Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived in force. The Amazonian people and the Cayapas of Coastal Ecuador were the only groups to resist both Inca and Spanish domination, maintaining their languages and cultures well into the 21st century.
Before the arrival of the Spaniards, the Inca Empire was involved in a civil war. The untimely death of both the heir Ninan Cuyochi and the Emperor Huayna Capac, from a European disease that spread into Ecuador, created a power vacuum between two factions and led to a civil war. The army stationed north headed by Atahualpa marched south to Cuzco and massacred the royal family associated with his brother. In 1532, a small band of Spaniards headed by Francisco Pizarro reached Cajamarca and lured Atahualpa into a trap (battle of Cajamarca). Pizarro promised to release Atahualpa if he made good his promise of filling a room full of gold. But, after a mock trial, the Spaniards executed Atahualpa by strangulation.

Spanish colonization
New infectious diseases such as smallpox, endemic to the Europeans, caused high fatalities among the Amerindian population during the first decades of Spanish rule, as they had no immunity. At the same time, the natives were forced into the encomienda labor system for the Spanish. In 1563, Quito became the seat of a real audiencia (administrative district) of Spain and part of the Viceroyalty of Peru and later the Viceroyalty of New Granada.
The 1797 Riobamba earthquake, which caused up to 40,000 casualties, was studied by Alexander von Humboldt, when he visited the area in 1801–1802.
After nearly 300 years of Spanish rule, Quito still remained small with a population of 10,000 people. On 10 August 1809, the city's criollos called for independence from Spain (first among the peoples of Latin America). They were led by Juan Pío Montúfar, Quiroga, Salinas, and Bishop Cuero y Caicedo. Quito's nickname, "Luz de América" ("Light of America"), is based on its leading role in trying to secure an independent, local government.  Although the new government lasted no more than two months, it had important repercussions and was an inspiration for the independence movement of the rest of Spanish America. Today, 10 August is celebrated as Independence Day, a national holiday.

Independence
On 9 October 1820, the Department of Guayaquil became the first territory in Ecuador to gain its independence from Spain, and it spawned most of the Ecuadorian coastal provinces, establishing itself as an independent state. Its inhabitants celebrated what is now Ecuador's official Independence Day on 24 May 1822. The rest of Ecuador gained its independence after Antonio José de Sucre defeated the Spanish Royalist forces at the Battle of Pichincha, near Quito. Following the battle, Ecuador joined Simón Bolívar's Republic of Gran Colombia, also including modern-day Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama. In 1830, Ecuador separated from Gran Colombia and became an independent republic. Two years later, it annexed the Galapagos Islands.
The 19th century was marked by instability for Ecuador with a rapid succession of rulers. The first president of Ecuador was the Venezuelan-born Juan José Flores, who was ultimately deposed. Leaders who followed him included Vicente Rocafuerte; José Joaquín de Olmedo; José María Urbina; Diego Noboa; Pedro José de Arteta; Manuel de Ascásubi; and Flores's own son, Antonio Flores Jijón, among others. The conservative Gabriel García Moreno unified the country in the 1860s with the support of the Roman Catholic Church. In the late 19th century, world demand for cocoa tied the economy to commodity exports and led to migrations from the highlands to the agricultural frontier on the coast.
Ecuador abolished slavery in 1851. The descendants of enslaved Ecuadorians are among today's Afro-Ecuadorian population. Also abolished during this time was indigenous tribute in 1857. Upon this, the indigenous were now equal under the law compared to everyone else. They were now registered as contributors to the nation, and became roles such as property holders, taxpayers, and potential military recruits just as everyone else.

Liberal Revolution
The Liberal Revolution of 1895 under Eloy Alfaro reduced the power of the clergy and the conservative land owners. This liberal wing retained power until the military "Julian Revolution" of 1925. The 1930s and 1940s were marked by instability and emergence of populist politicians, such as five-time President José María Velasco Ibarra.

Loss of claimed territories since 1830
After Ecuador's separation from Colombia on 13 May 1830, its first President, General Juan José Flores, laid claim to the territory that had belonged to the Real Audiencia of Quito, also referred to as the Presidencia of Quito. He supported his claims with Spanish Royal decrees, or real cedulas, that delineated the borders of Spain's former overseas colonies. In the case of Ecuador, Flores based Ecuador's de jure claims on the Real Cedulas of 1563, 1739, and 1740; with modifications in the Amazon Basin and Andes Mountains that were introduced through the Treaty of Guayaquil (1829) which Peru reluctantly signed, after the overwhelmingly outnumbered Gran Colombian force led by Antonio José de Sucre defeated President and General La Mar's Peruvian invasion force in the Battle of Tarqui. In addition, Ecuador's eastern border with the Portuguese colony of Brazil in the Amazon Basin was modified before the Wars of Independence by the First Treaty of San Ildefonso (1777) between the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire. Moreover, to add legitimacy to his claims, on 16 February 1840, Flores signed a treaty with Spain, whereby Flores convinced Spain to officially recognize Ecuadorian independence and its sole rights to colonial titles over Spain's former colonial territory known anciently to Spain as the Kingdom and Presidency of Quito.
Ecuador during its long and turbulent history has lost most of its contested territories to each of its more powerful neighbors, such as Colombia in 1832 and 1916, Brazil in 1904 through a series of peace treaties, and Peru after a short war in which the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro was signed in 1942.

Struggle for independence
During the struggle for independence, before Peru or Ecuador became independent, areas of the former Vice Royalty of New Granada declared themselves independent from Spain. A few months later, a part of the Peruvian liberation army of San Martín decided to occupy the independent cities of Tumbez and Jaén, with the intention of using them as springboards to occupy the independent city of Guayaquil and then liberate the rest of the Audiencia de Quito (Ecuador). It was common knowledge among officers of the liberation army from the south that their leader San Martín wished to liberate present-day Ecuador and add it to the future republic of Peru, since it had been part of the Inca Empire before the Spaniards conquered it. However, Bolívar's intention was to form a new republic known as the Gran Colombia, out of the liberated Spanish territory of New Granada which consisted of Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador. San Martín's plans were thwarted when Bolívar, descended from the Andes mountains and occupied Guayaquil; they also annexed the newly liberated Audiencia de Quito to the Republic of Gran Colombia.
In the south, Ecuador had claims to a small piece of land beside the Pacific Ocean known as Tumbes. In Ecuador's southern Andes Mountain region where the Marañon cuts across, Ecuador had claims to an area it called Jaén de Bracamoros. These areas were included as part of the territory of Gran Colombia by Bolivar on 17 December 1819, during the Congress of Angostura when the Republic of Gran Colombia was created. Tumbes declared itself independent from Spain on 17 January 1821, and Jaén de Bracamoros on 17 June 1821, without any outside help from revolutionary armies. However, that same year, Peruvian forces participating in the Trujillo revolution occupied both Jaén and Tumbes. Peruvian generals, without any legal titles backing them up and with Ecuador still federated with the Gran Colombia, had the desire to annex Ecuador to the Republic of Peru at the expense of the Gran Colombia, feeling that Ecuador was once part of the Inca Empire.
On 28 July 1821, Peruvian independence was proclaimed in Lima by San Martín, and Tumbes and Jaén, which were included as part of the revolution of Trujillo by the Peruvian occupying force, had the whole region swear allegiance to the new Peruvian flag and incorporated itself into Peru. Gran Colombia had always protested Peru for the return of Jaén and Tumbes for almost a decade, then finally Bolivar after long and futile discussion over the return of Jaén, Tumbes, and part of Mainas, declared war. President and General José de La Mar, who was born in Ecuador, believing his opportunity had come to annex the District of Ecuador to Peru, personally, with a Peruvian force, invaded and occupied Guayaquil and a few cities in the Loja region of southern Ecuador on 28 November 1828.
The war ended when an outnumbered southern Gran Colombian army at Battle of Tarqui on 27 February 1829, led by Antonio José de Sucre, defeated the Peruvian invasion force led by President La Mar. This defeat led to the signing of the Treaty of Guayaquil in September 1829, whereby Peru and its Congress recognized Gran Colombian rights over Tumbes, Jaén, and Maynas. Through meetings between Peru and Gran Colombia, the border was set as Tumbes river in the west, and in the east, the Maranon and Amazon rivers were to be followed toward Brazil as the most natural borders between them. According to the peace negotiations Peru agreed to return Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Jaén; despite this, Peru returned Guayaquil, but failed to return Tumbes and Jaén, alleging that it was not obligated to follow the agreements, since the Gran Colombia ceased to exist when it divided itself into three different nations – Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.

The Central District of the Gran Colombia, known as Cundinamarca or New Granada (modern Colombia) with its capital in Bogota, did not recognize the separation of the Southern District of the Gran Colombia, with its capital in Quito, from the Gran Colombian federation on 13 May 1830. After Ecuador's separation, the Department of Cauca voluntarily decided to unite itself with Ecuador due to instability in the central government of Bogota. The Venezuelan born President of Ecuador, the general Juan José Flores, with the approval of the Ecuadorian congress annexed the Department of Cauca on 20 December 1830, since the government of Cauca had called for union with the District of the South as far back as April 1830. Moreover, the Cauca region, throughout its long history, had very strong economic and cultural ties with the people of Ecuador. Also, the Cauca region, which included such cities as Pasto, Popayán, and Buenaventura, had always been dependent on the Presidencia or Audiencia of Quito.
Fruitless negotiations continued between the governments of Bogotá and Quito, where the government of Bogotá did not recognize the separation of Ecuador or that of Cauca from the Gran Colombia until war broke out in May 1832. In five months, New Granada defeated Ecuador due to the fact that the majority of the Ecuadorian Armed Forces were composed of rebellious angry unpaid veterans from Venezuela and Colombia that did not want to fight against their fellow countrymen. Seeing that his officers were rebelling, mutinying, and changing sides, President Flores had no option but to reluctantly make peace with New Granada. The Treaty of Pasto of 1832 was signed by which the Department of Cauca was turned over to New Granada (modern Colombia), the government of Bogotá recognized Ecuador as an independent country and the border was to follow the Ley de División Territorial de la República de Colombia (Law of the Division of Territory of the Gran Colombia) passed on 25 June 1824. This law set the border at the river Carchi and the eastern border that stretched to Brazil at the Caquetá river. Later, Ecuador contended that the Republic of Colombia, while reorganizing its government, unlawfully made its eastern border provisional and that Colombia extended its claims south to the Napo River because it said that the Government of Popayán extended its control all the way to the Napo River.

Struggle for possession of the Amazon Basin
When Ecuador seceded from the Gran Colombia, Peru contested Ecuador's claims with the newly discovered Real Cedula of 1802, by which Peru claims the King of Spain had transferred these lands from the Viceroyalty of New Granada to the Viceroyalty of Peru. During colonial times this was to halt the ever-expanding Portuguese settlements into Spanish domains, which were left vacant and in disorder after the expulsion of Jesuit missionaries from their bases along the Amazon Basin. Ecuador countered by labeling the Cedula of 1802 an ecclesiastical instrument, which had nothing to do with political borders. Peru began its de facto occupation of disputed Amazonian territories, after it signed a secret 1851 peace treaty in favor of Brazil. This treaty disregarded Spanish rights that were confirmed during colonial times by a Spanish-Portuguese treaty over the Amazon regarding territories held by illegal Portuguese settlers.
Peru began occupying the missionary villages in the Mainas or Maynas region, which it began calling Loreto, with its capital in Iquitos. During its negotiations with Brazil, Peru claimed Amazonian Basin territories up to Caqueta River in the north and toward the Andes Mountain range. Colombia protested stating that its claims extended south toward the Napo and Amazon Rivers. Ecuador protested that it claimed the Amazon Basin between the Caqueta river and the Marañon-Amazon river. Peru ignored these protests and created the Department of Loreto in 1853 with its capital in Iquitos. Peru briefly occupied Guayaquil again in 1860, since Peru thought that Ecuador was selling some of the disputed land for development to British bond holders, but returned Guayaquil after a few months. The border dispute was then submitted to Spain for arbitration from 1880 to 1910, but to no avail.
In the early part of the 20th century, Ecuador made an effort to peacefully define its eastern Amazonian borders with its neighbors through negotiation. On 6 May 1904, Ecuador signed the Tobar-Rio Branco Treaty recognizing Brazil's claims to the Amazon in recognition of Ecuador's claim to be an Amazonian country to counter Peru's earlier Treaty with Brazil back on 23 October 1851. Then after a few meetings with the Colombian government's representatives an agreement was reached and the Muñoz Vernaza-Suarez Treaty was signed 15 July 1916, in which Colombian rights to the Putumayo river were recognized as well as Ecuador's rights to the Napo river and the new border was a line that ran midpoint between those two rivers. In this way, Ecuador gave up the claims it had to the Amazonian territories between the Caquetá River and Napo River to Colombia, thus cutting itself off from Brazil. Later, a brief war erupted between Colombia and Peru, over Peru's claims to the Caquetá region, which ended with Peru reluctantly signing the Salomon-Lozano Treaty on 24 March 1922. Ecuador protested this secret treaty, since Colombia gave away Ecuadorian claimed land to Peru that Ecuador had given to Colombia in 1916.
On 21 July 1924, the Ponce-Castro Oyanguren Protocol was signed between Ecuador and Peru where both agreed to hold direct negotiations and to resolve the dispute in an equitable manner and to submit the differing points of the dispute to the United States for arbitration. Negotiations between the Ecuadorian and Peruvian representatives began in Washington on 30 September 1935. The negotiations turned into arguments during the next 7 months and finally on 29 September 1937, the Peruvian representatives decided to break off the negotiations.
In 1941, amid fast-growing tensions within disputed territories around the Zarumilla River, war broke out with Peru. Peru claimed that Ecuador's military presence in Peruvian-claimed territory was an invasion; Ecuador, for its part, claimed that Peru had recently invaded Ecuador around the Zarumilla River and that Peru since Ecuador's independence from Spain has systematically occupied Tumbez, Jaén, and most of the disputed territories in the Amazonian Basin between the Putomayo and Marañon Rivers. In July 1941, troops were mobilized in both countries. Peru had an army of 11,681 troops who faced a poorly supplied and inadequately armed Ecuadorian force of 2,300, of which only 1,300 were deployed in the southern provinces. Hostilities erupted on 5 July 1941, when Peruvian forces crossed the Zarumilla river at several locations, testing the strength and resolve of the Ecuadorian border troops. Finally, on 23 July 1941, the Peruvians launched a major invasion, crossing the Zarumilla river in force and advancing into the Ecuadorian province of El Oro.

During the course of the Ecuadorian–Peruvian War, Peru gained control over part of the disputed territory and some parts of the province of El Oro, and some parts of the province of Loja, demanding that the Ecuadorian government give up its territorial claims. The Peruvian Navy blocked the port of Guayaquil, almost cutting all supplies to the Ecuadorian troops. After a few weeks of war and under pressure by the United States and several Latin American nations, all fighting came to a stop. Ecuador and Peru came to an accord formalized in the Rio Protocol, signed on 29 January 1942, in favor of hemispheric unity against the Axis powers in World War II favoring Peru with the territory they occupied at the time the war came to an end.
The 1944 Glorious May Revolution followed a military-civilian rebellion and a subsequent civic strike which successfully removed Carlos Arroyo del Río as a dictator from Ecuador's government. However, a post-Second World War recession and popular unrest led to a return to populist politics and domestic military interventions in the 1960s, while foreign companies developed oil resources in the Ecuadorian Amazon. In 1972, construction of the Andean pipeline was completed. The pipeline brought oil from the east side of the Andes to the coast, making Ecuador South America's second largest oil exporter.

The Rio Protocol failed to precisely resolve the border along a little river in the remote Cordillera del Cóndor region in southern Ecuador. This caused a long-simmering dispute between Ecuador and Peru, which ultimately led to fighting between the two countries; first a border skirmish in January–February 1981 known as the Paquisha Incident, and ultimately full-scale warfare in January 1995 where the Ecuadorian military shot down Peruvian aircraft and helicopters and Peruvian infantry marched into southern Ecuador. Each country blamed the other for the onset of hostilities, known as the Cenepa War. Sixto Durán Ballén, the Ecuadorian president, famously declared that he would not give up a single centimeter of Ecuador. Popular sentiment in Ecuador became strongly nationalistic against Peru: graffiti could be seen on the walls of Quito referring to Peru as the "Cain de Latinoamérica", a reference to the murder of Abel by his brother Cain in the Book of Genesis.
Ecuador and Peru signed the Brasilia Presidential Act peace agreement on 26 October 1998, which ended hostilities, and effectively put an end to the Western Hemisphere's longest running territorial dispute. The Guarantors of the Rio Protocol (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States of America) ruled that the border of the undelineated zone was to be set at the line of the Cordillera del Cóndor. While Ecuador had to give up its decades-old territorial claims to the eastern slopes of the Cordillera, as well as to the entire western area of Cenepa headwaters, Peru was compelled to give to Ecuador, in perpetual lease but without sovereignty, 1 km2 (0.39 sq mi) of its territory, in the area where the Ecuadorian base of Tiwinza – focal point of the war – had been located within Peruvian soil and which the Ecuadorian Army held during the conflict. The final border demarcation came into effect on 13 May 1999, and the multi-national MOMEP (Military Observer Mission for Ecuador and Peru) troop deployment withdrew on 17 June 1999.

Military governments (1972–79)
In 1972, a "revolutionary and nationalist" military junta overthrew the government of Velasco Ibarra. The coup d'état was led by General Guillermo Rodríguez and executed by navy commander Jorge Queirolo G. The new president exiled José María Velasco to Argentina. He remained in power until 1976, when he was removed by another military government. That military junta was led by Admiral Alfredo Poveda, who was declared chairman of the Supreme Council. The Supreme Council included two other members: General Guillermo Durán Arcentales and General Luis Pintado. The civil society more and more insistently called for democratic elections. Colonel Richelieu Levoyer, Government Minister, proposed and implemented a Plan to return to the constitutional system through universal elections. This plan enabled the new democratically elected president to assume the duties of the executive office.

Return to democracy (1979–present)
Elections were held on 29 April 1979, under a new constitution. Jaime Roldós Aguilera was elected president, garnering over one million votes, the most in Ecuadorian history. He took office on 10 August as the first constitutionally elected president, after nearly a decade of civilian and military dictatorships. In 1980, he founded the Partido Pueblo, Cambio y Democracia (People, Change, and Democracy Party) after withdrawing from the Concentración de Fuerzas Populares (Popular Forces Concentration). He governed until 24 May 1981, when he died, along with his wife and the minister of defense Marco Subia Martinez, when his Air Force plane crashed in heavy rain near the Peruvian border. Many people believe that he was assassinated by the CIA, given the multiple death threats against him because of his reformist agenda, the deaths in automobile crashes of two key witnesses before they could testify during the investigation, and the sometimes contradictory accounts of the incident. Roldos was immediately succeeded by Vice President Osvaldo Hurtado.

In 1984, León Febres Cordero from the Social Christian Party was elected president. Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Democratic Left (Izquierda Democrática, or ID) party won the presidency in 1988, winning the runoff election against Abdalá Bucaram (brother in law of Jaime Roldos and founder of the Ecuadorian Roldosist Party). His government was committed to improving human rights protection and carried out some reforms, notably an opening of Ecuador to foreign trade. The Borja government negotiated the disbanding of the small terrorist group, "¡Alfaro Vive, Carajo!" ("Alfaro Lives, Dammit!"), named after Eloy Alfaro. However, continuing economic problems undermined the popularity of the ID party, and opposition parties gained control of Congress in 1999.
A notable event was the Cenepa War fought between Ecuador and Peru in 1995.
Ecuador adopted the U.S. dollar on 13 April 2000 as its national currency and on 11 September, the country eliminated the Ecuadorian sucre, in order to stabilize the country's economy. The U.S. Dollar has been the only official currency of Ecuador since then.
The emergence of the Amerindian population as an active constituency has added to the democratic volatility of the country in recent years. The population has been motivated by government failures to deliver on promises of land reform, lower unemployment and provision of social services, and the historical exploitation by the land-holding elite. Their movement, along with the continuing destabilizing efforts by both the elite and leftist movements, has led to a deterioration of the executive office. The populace and the other branches of government give the president very little political capital, as illustrated by the most recent removal of President Lucio Gutiérrez from office by Congress in April 2005. Vice President Alfredo Palacio took his place
In the election of 2006, Rafael Correa gained the presidency. In January 2007, several left-wing political leaders of Latin America, his future allies, attended his swearing-in ceremony. Endorsed in a 2008 referendum, a new constitution implemented leftist reforms. In December 2008, Correa declared Ecuador's national debt illegitimate, based on the argument that it was odious debt contracted by prior corrupt and despotic regimes. He announced that the country would default on over $3 billion worth of bonds, and he succeeded in reducing the price of outstanding bonds by more than 60% by fighting creditors in international courts. He brought Ecuador into the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas in June 2009. Correa's administration reduced the high levels of poverty and unemployment in Ecuador.
Correa's three consecutive terms (from 2007 to 2017) were followed by his former Vice President Lenín Moreno's four years as president (2017–21). After being elected in 2017, President Moreno's government adopted economically liberal policies, such as reduction of public spending, trade liberalization, and flexibility of the labor code. Ecuador also left the left-wing Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (Alba) in August 2018. The Productive Development Act introduced an austerity policy, and reduced the previous development and redistribution policies. Regarding taxes, the authorities aimed to "encourage the return of investors" by granting amnesty to fraudsters and proposing measures to reduce tax rates for large companies. In addition, the government waived the right to tax increases in raw material prices and foreign exchange repatriations. In October 2018, Moreno cut diplomatic relations with the Maduro administration of Venezuela, a close ally of Correa. The relations with the United States improved significantly under Moreno. In June 2019, Ecuador agreed to allow U.S. military planes to operate from an airport on the Galapagos Islands. In February 2020, his visit to Washington was the first meeting between an Ecuadorian and U.S. president in 17 years.
A series of protests began on 3 October 2019 against the end of fuel subsidies and austerity measures adopted by Moreno. On 10 October, protesters overran Quito, the capital, causing the Government of Ecuador to relocate temporarily to Guayaquil. The government eventually returned to Quito in 2019. On 14 October 2019, the government restored fuel subsidies and withdrew an austerity package, which ended nearly two weeks of protests.

In the 11 April 2021 election, conservative former banker Guillermo Lasso took 52.4% of the vote, compared to 47.6% for left-wing economist Andrés Aráuz, who was supported by exiled former president Correa. Lasso had finished second in the 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. On 24 May 2021, Lasso was sworn in, becoming the country's first right-wing leader in 14 years. Lasso's party Creating Opportunities (CREO Movement), and its ally the Social Christian Party (PSC) won only 31 parliamentary seats out of 137, while Aráuz's Union for Hope (UNES) won 49 seats, which meant Lasso needed support from the Izquierda Democrática and the indigenist Pachakutik parties to push through his legislative agenda.
In October 2021, Lasso declared a 60-day state of emergency to combat crime and drug-related violence, including the numerous bloody clashes between rival groups in the state prisons. Lasso proposed a series of constitutional changes to enhance his government's ability to respond to crime. In a referendum in February 2023, voters overwhelmingly rejected his proposed changes, which weakened Lasso's political standing.
On 15 October 2023, centrist candidate Daniel Noboa won the premature presidential election with 52.3% of the vote against leftist candidate Luisa González. On 23 November 2023, Noboa was sworn in.
In January 2024, Noboa declared an "internal armed conflict" against organized crime in response to the escape of the imprisoned leader of the Los Choneros cartel and terrorist group, José Adolfo Macías Villamar (also known as "Fito"), and an armed attack at a public television channel. In April 2025,  President Daniel Noboa won the run-off round of Ecuador's presidential election, meaning he will now serve a full four-year term. In June 2025, Fito was recaptured and extradited to the United States to face charges of international cocaine distribution conspiracy, use of firearms in furtherance of drug trafficking and straw purchasing of firearms conspiracy. Fito pled not guilty to all charges and is currently awaiting conviction. In October 2025, five people were arrested following an alleged assassination attempt on President Daniel Noboa.
In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Ecuador ranks 58th out of 127 countries with a score of 11.6, which indicates a moderate level of hunger. In 2026, the United Nations reported that 2.6 million people in Ecuador are facing acute hunger amid an unprecedented crisis.

Geography
According to the CIA World Factbook, Ecuador has a total area of 283,571 km2 (109,487 sq mi), including the Galápagos Islands. Of this, 276,841 km2 (106,889 sq mi) is land and 6,720 km2 (2,595 sq mi) water. The total area, according to the Ecuadorian government's foreign ministry, is 256,370 km2 (98,985 sq mi). The Galápagos Islands are sometimes considered part of Oceania, which would thus make Ecuador a transcontinental country under certain definitions. Ecuador is bigger than the South America countries Uruguay, Suriname, Guyana and French Guiana.
Ecuador lies between latitudes 2°N and 5°S,
bounded on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and has 2,337 km (1,452 mi) of coastline. It has 2,010 km (1,250 mi) of land boundaries, with Colombia in the north (with a 590 km (367 mi) border) and Peru in the east and south (with a 1,420 km (882 mi) border). It is the westernmost country that lies on the equator.
The country has four main geographic regions:

La Costa, or "the coast": The coastal region consists of the provinces to the west of the Andean range – Esmeraldas, Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí, El Oro, Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas and Santa Elena. It is the country's most fertile and productive land, and is the seat of the large banana exportation plantations of the companies Dole and Chiquita. This region is also where most of Ecuador's rice crop is grown. The truly coastal provinces have active fisheries. The largest coastal city is Guayaquil.
La Sierra, or "the highlands": The sierra consists of the Andean and Interandean highland provinces – Azuay, Cañar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Imbabura, Loja, Pichincha, Bolívar, Cotopaxi and Tungurahua. This land contains most of Ecuador's volcanoes and all of its snow-capped peaks. Agriculture is focused on the traditional crops of potato, maize, and quinua and the population is predominantly Amerindian Kichua. The largest Sierran city is Quito.
La Amazonía, also known as la selva, or "the jungle": The oriente consists of the Amazon jungle provinces – Morona Santiago, Napo, Orellana, Pastaza, Sucumbíos, and Zamora-Chinchipe. This region is primarily made up of the huge Amazon national parks and Amerindian untouchable zones, which are vast stretches of land set aside for the Amazon Amerindian tribes to continue living traditionally. It is also the area with the largest reserves of petroleum in Ecuador, and parts of the upper Amazon here have been extensively exploited by petroleum companies. The population is primarily mixed Amerindian Shuar, Waorani and Kichua, although there are numerous tribes in the deep jungle which are little-contacted. The largest city in the Oriente Lago Agrio in Sucumbíos.
La Región Insular is the region comprising the Galápagos Islands, some 1,000 kilometers (620 mi) west of the mainland in the Pacific Ocean.
Ecuador's capital and second largest city is Quito, which is in the province of Pichincha in the Sierra region. It is the second-highest capital city with an elevation of 2,850 meters. Ecuador's largest city is Guayaquil, in the Guayas Province. Cotopaxi, just south of Quito, is one of the world's highest active volcanoes. The top of Mount Chimborazo (6,268 m, or 20,560 ft, above sea level), Ecuador's tallest mountain, is the most distant point from the center of the Earth on the Earth's surface because of the ellipsoid shape of the planet.
The Andes is the watershed divisor between the Amazon watershed, which runs to the east, and the Pacific, including the north–south rivers Mataje, Santiago, Esmeraldas, Chone, Guayas, Jubones, and Puyango-Tumbes.

Climate
There is great variety in the climate, largely determined by altitude. It is mild year-round in the mountain valleys, with a humid subtropical climate in coastal areas and rainforest in lowlands. The Pacific coastal area has a tropical climate with a severe rainy season. The climate in the Andean highlands is temperate and relatively dry, and the Amazon basin on the eastern side of the mountains shares the climate of other rainforest zones.
Because of its location at the equator, Ecuador experiences little variation in daylight hours during the course of a year. Both sunrise and sunset occur each day at the two six o'clock hours.
The country has seen its seven glaciers lose 54.4% of their surface in forty years. Research predicts their disappearance by 2100. The cause is climate change, which threatens both the fauna and flora and the population.

Biodiversity
Ecuador is one of seventeen megadiverse countries in the world according to Conservation International, and it has the most biodiversity per square kilometer of any nation.
Ecuador has 1,600 bird species (15% of the world's known bird species) in the continental area and 38 more endemic in the Galápagos. In addition to more than 16,000 species of plants, the country has 106 endemic reptiles, 138 endemic amphibians, and 6,000 species of butterfly. The Galápagos Islands are well known as a region of distinct fauna, as the famous place of birth to Darwin's theory of evolution, and as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Ecuador was the first country to recognize the rights of nature in its constitution. The protection of the nation's biodiversity is an explicit national priority as stated in the National Plan of "Buen Vivir", or good living, Objective 4, "Guarantee the rights of nature", Policy 1: "Sustainably conserve and manage the natural heritage, including its land and marine biodiversity, which is considered a strategic sector".

As of the writing of the plan in 2008, 19% of Ecuador's land area was protected; however, the plan also states that 32% of the land must be protected in order to truly preserve the nation's biodiversity. Current protected areas include 11 national parks, 10 wildlife refuges, 9 ecological reserves, and other areas. A program begun in 2008, Sociobosque, is preserving another 2.3% of total land area (6,295 km2, or 629,500 ha) by paying private landowners or community landowners (such as Amerindian tribes) incentives to maintain their land as native ecosystems such as native forests or grasslands. Eligibility and subsidy rates for this program are determined based on the poverty in the region, the number of hectares that will be protected, and the type of ecosystem of the land to be protected, among other factors. Ecuador had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.66/10, ranking it 35th globally out of 172 countries.
Despite being on the UNESCO list, the Galápagos are endangered by a range of negative environmental effects, threatening the existence of this exotic ecosystem. Additionally, oil exploitation of the Amazon rainforest has led to the release of billions of gallons of untreated wastes, gas, and crude oil into the environment, contaminating ecosystems and causing detrimental health effects to Amerindian peoples. One of the best known examples is the Texaco-Chevron case. This American oil company operated in the Ecuadorian Amazon region between 1964 and 1992. During this period, Texaco drilled 339 wells in 15 petroleum fields and abandoned 627 toxic wastewater pits. It is now known that these highly polluting and now obsolete technologies were used as a way to reduce expenses. The case has also been documented in Crude, a documentary.
In 2022, the supreme court of Ecuador decided that "under no circumstances can a project be carried out that generates excessive sacrifices to the collective rights of communities and nature." It also required the government to respect the opinion of Indigenous peoples about industrial projects on their land.

Government and politics
The Ecuadorian State consists of five branches of government: the Executive Branch, the Legislative Branch, the Judicial Branch, the Electoral Branch, and Transparency and Social Control.
Ecuador is governed by a democratically elected president for a four-year term. The president of Ecuador exercises power from the presidential Palacio de Carondelet in Quito. The current constitution was written by the Ecuadorian Constituent Assembly elected in 2007, and was approved by referendum in 2008. Since 1936, voting is compulsory for all literate persons aged 18–65, optional for all other citizens over the age of 16.
The executive branch includes 23 ministries. Provincial governors and councilors (mayors, aldermen, and parish boards) are directly elected. The National Assembly of Ecuador meets throughout the year except for recesses in July and December. There are thirteen permanent committees. Members of the National Court of Justice are appointed by the National Judicial Council for nine-year terms.
According to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Ecuador performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in freedom of religion, inclusive suffrage, and electoral participation.

Executive branch
The executive branch is led by the president. The president is accompanied by the vice-president, elected for four years (with the ability to be re-elected only once). As head of state and chief government official, the president is responsible for public administration including the appointing of national coordinators, ministers, ministers of State and public servants. The executive branch defines foreign policy, appoints the Chancellor of the Republic, as well as ambassadors and consuls, being the ultimate authority over the Armed Forces of Ecuador, National Police of Ecuador, and appointing authorities. The acting president's wife receives the title of First Lady of Ecuador.

Legislative branch
The legislative branch is embodied by the National Assembly, which is headquartered in the city of Quito in the Legislative Palace, and consists of 137 assemblymen, divided into ten committees and elected for a four-year term. Fifteen national constituency elected assembly, two Assembly members elected from each province and one for every 100,000 inhabitants or fraction exceeding 150,000, according to the latest national population census. In addition, statute determines the election of assembly of regions and metropolitan districts.

Judicial branch
Ecuador's judiciary has as its main body the Judicial Council, and also includes the National Court of Justice, provincial courts, and lower courts. Legal representation is made by the Judicial Council.
The National Court of Justice is composed of 21 judges elected for a term of nine years. Judges are renewed by thirds every three years pursuant to the Judicial Code. These are elected by the Judicial Council on the basis of opposition proceedings and merits.
The justice system is buttressed by the independent offices of public prosecutor and the public defender. Auxiliary organs are as follows: notaries, court auctioneers, and court receivers. Also there is a special legal regime for Amerindians.

Electoral branch
The electoral system functions by authorities which enter only every four years or when elections or referendums occur. Its main functions are to organize, control elections, and punish the infringement of electoral rules. Its main body is the National Electoral Council, which is based in the city of Quito, and consists of seven members of the political parties most voted, enjoying complete financial and administrative autonomy. This body, along with the electoral court, forms the Electoral Branch which is one of Ecuador's five branches of government.

Transparency and social control branch
The Transparency and Social Control consists of the Council for Citizen Participation and Social Control, an ombudsman, the Comptroller General of the State, and the superintendents. Branch members hold office for five years. This branch is responsible for promoting transparency and control plans publicly, as well as plans to design mechanisms to combat corruption, as also designate certain authorities, and be the regulatory mechanism of accountability in the country.

Administrative divisions
Ecuador is divided into 24 provinces (Spanish: provincias), each with its own administrative capital:

Regions and planning areas
Regionalization, or zoning, is the union of two or more adjoining provinces in order to decentralize the administrative functions of the capital, Quito.
In Ecuador, there are seven regions, or zones, each shaped by the following provinces:

Region 1 (42,126 km2, or 16,265 mi2): Esmeraldas, Carchi, Imbabura, and Sucumbios. Administrative city: Ibarra
Region 2 (43,498 km2, or 16,795 mi2): Pichincha, Napo, and Orellana. Administrative city: Tena
Region 3 (44,710 km2, or 17,263 mi2): Chimborazo, Tungurahua, Pastaza, and Cotopaxi. Administrative city: Riobamba
Region 4 (22,257 km2, or 8,594 mi2): Manabí and Santo Domingo de los Tsachilas. Administrative city: Ciudad Alfaro
Region 5 (38,420 km2, or 14,834 mi2): Santa Elena, Guayas, Los Ríos, Galápagos, and Bolívar. Administrative city: Milagro
Region 6 (38,237 km2, or 14,763 mi2): Cañar, Azuay, and Morona Santiago. Administrative city: Cuenca
Region 7 (27,571 km2, or 10,645 mi2): El Oro, Loja, and Zamora Chinchipe. Administrative city: Loja
Quito and Guayaquil are Metropolitan Districts. Galápagos, despite being included within Region 5, is also under a special unit.

Foreign relations
Ecuador joined the OPEC in 1973 and suspended its membership in 1992. Under President Rafael Correa, the country returned to OPEC before leaving again in 2020 under the instruction of President Moreno, citing its desire to increase crude oil exportation to gain more revenue.
Ecuador has maintained a research station in Antarctica for peaceful scientific study as a member nation of the Antarctica Treaty. Ecuador has often placed great emphasis on multilateral approaches to international issues. Ecuador is a member of the United Nations (and most of its specialized agencies) and a member of many regional groups, including the Rio Group, the Latin American Economic System, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Latin American Integration Association, the Andean Community of Nations, and the Bank of the South (Spanish: Banco del Sur or BancoSur).
In 2017, the Ecuadorian parliament adopted a law on human mobility.
The International Organization for Migration lauded Ecuador as the first state to have established the promotion of the concept of universal citizenship in its constitution, aiming to promote the universal recognition and protection of the human rights of migrants. In March 2019, Ecuador withdrew from the Union of South American Nations.

Military
The Ecuadorian Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas de la Republica de Ecuador), consists of the Army, Air Force, and Navy and have the stated responsibility for the preservation of the integrity and national sovereignty of the national territory.
Due to the continuous border disputes with Peru, finally settled in the early 2000s, and due to the ongoing problem with the Colombian guerrilla insurgency infiltrating Amazonian provinces, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has gone through a series of changes. In 2009, the new administration at the Defense Ministry launched a deep restructuring within the forces, increasing spending budget to $1,691,776,803, an increase of 25%.
The Military Academy General Eloy Alfaro (c. 1838) located in Quito is in charge of graduating army officers. The Ecuadorian Navy Academy (c. 1837), located in Salinas graduates navy officers. The Air Academy Cosme Rennella (c. 1920), also located in Salinas, graduates air force officers.

Human rights
A 2003 Amnesty International report was critical that there were scarce few prosecutions for human rights violations committed by security forces, and those only in police courts, which are not considered impartial or independent. There are allegations that the security forces routinely torture prisoners. There are reports of prisoners having died while in police custody. Sometimes the legal process can be delayed until the suspect can be released after the time limit for detention without trial is exceeded. Prisons are overcrowded and conditions in detention centers are "abominable".
UN's Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic Review has treated the restrictions on freedom of expression and efforts to control NGOs and recommended that Ecuador should stop the criminal sanctions for the expression of opinions, and delay in implementing judicial reforms. Ecuador rejected the recommendation on decriminalization of libel.
According to Human Rights Watch (HRW) former president Correa intimidated journalists and subjected them to "public denunciation and retaliatory litigation". The sentences to journalists were years of imprisonment and millions of dollars of compensation, even though defendants had been pardoned. Correa stated he was only seeking a retraction for slanderous statements.
According to HRW, Correa's government weakened the freedom of press and independence of the judicial system. In Ecuador's current judicial system, judges are selected in a contest of merits, rather than government appointments. However, the process of selection has been criticized as biased and subjective. In particular, the final interview is said to be given "excessive weighing". Judges and prosecutors that made decisions in favor of Correa in his lawsuits had received permanent posts, while others with better assessment grades had been rejected.
The laws also forbid articles and media messages that could favor or disfavor some political message or candidate. In the first half of 2012, twenty private TV or radio stations were closed down. People engaging in public protests against environmental and other issues are prosecuted for "terrorism and sabotage", which may lead to an eight-year prison sentence.
According to Freedom House, restrictions on the media and civil society have decreased since 2017. In October 2022, the United Nations expressed concerns about the dire situation in various detention centers and prisons, and the human rights of those deprived of liberty in Ecuador.

Economy
Ecuador has a developing economy that is highly dependent on commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products. The country is classified as an upper-middle-income country. Ecuador's economy is the eighth largest in Latin America and experienced an average growth of 4.6% between 2000 and 2006. From 2007 to 2012, Ecuador's GDP grew at an annual average of 4.3 percent, above the average for Latin America and the Caribbean, which was 3.5%, according to the United Nations' Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Ecuador was able to maintain relatively superior growth during the 2008 financial crisis. In January 2009, the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) put the 2010 growth forecast at 6.88%. In 2011, its GDP grew at 8% and ranked third highest in Latin America, behind Argentina (2nd) and Panama (1st). Between 1999 and 2007, GDP doubled, reaching $65,490 million according to BCE.
The inflation rate until January 2008, was about 1.14%, the highest in the past year, according to the government. The monthly unemployment rate remained at about 6 and 8 percent from December 2007 until September 2008; however, it went up to about 9 percent in October and dropped again in November 2008 to 8 percent. Unemployment mean annual rate for 2009 in Ecuador was 8.5% because the global economic crisis continued to affect the Latin American economies. From this point, unemployment rates started a downward trend: 7.6% in 2010, 6.0% in 2011, and 4.8% in 2012.
The extreme poverty rate declined significantly between 1999 and 2010. In 2001, it was estimated at 40% of the population, while by 2011 the figure dropped to 17.4% of the total population. This is explained to an extent by emigration and the economic stability achieved after adopting the U.S. dollar as official means of transaction (before 2000, the Ecuadorian sucre was prone to rampant inflation). However, starting in 2008, with the bad economic performance of the nations where most Ecuadorian emigrants work, the reduction of poverty has been realized through social spending, mainly in education and health.

Oil accounts for 40% of exports and contributes to maintaining a positive trade balance. Since the late 1960s, the exploitation of oil increased production, and proven reserves are estimated at 6.51 billion barrels as of 2011. In late 2021, Ecuador had to declare a force majeure for oil exports due to erosion near key pipelines (privately owned OCP pipeline and state-owned SOTE pipeline) in the Amazon. It lasted about three weeks, totalling just over $500 million economic losses, before their production returned to its normal level of 435,000 barrels per day (69,200 m3/d) in early 2022.
The overall trade balance for August 2012 was a surplus of almost $390 million for the first six months of 2012, a huge figure compared with that of 2007, which reached only $5.7 million; the surplus had risen by about $425 million compared to 2006. The oil trade balance positive had revenues of $3.295 million in 2008, while non-oil was negative, amounting to $2.842 million. The trade balance with the United States, Chile, the European Union, Bolivia, Peru, Brazil, and Mexico is positive. The trade balance with Argentina, Colombia, and Asia is negative.
In the agricultural sector, Ecuador is a major exporter of bananas (first place worldwide in export), flowers, and the seventh largest producer of cocoa. Ecuador also produces coffee, rice, potatoes, cassava (manioc, tapioca), plantains and sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef, pork and dairy products; fish, and shrimp; and balsa wood. The country's vast resources include large amounts of timber across the country, like eucalyptus and mangroves. Pines and cedars are planted in the region of La Sierra and walnuts, rosemary, and balsa wood in the Guayas River Basin.
The industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably. This city is also the largest business center of the country. Industrial production is directed primarily to the domestic market. Despite this, there is limited export of products produced or processed industrially. These include canned foods, liquor, jewelry, furniture, and more. A minor industrial activity is also concentrated in Cuenca. Incomes from tourism has been increasing during the last few years due to promotion programs from Government, highlighting the variety of climates and the biodiversity of Ecuador.
Ecuador has negotiated bilateral treaties with other countries, besides belonging to the Andean Community of Nations, and an associate member of Mercosur. It also serves on the World Trade Organization (WTO), in addition to the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), CAF – Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean and other multilateral agencies. In April 2007, Ecuador paid off its debt to the IMF.
The public finance of Ecuador consists of the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE), the National Development Bank (BNF), the State Bank.

Sciences and research
Ecuador was placed in 96th position of innovation in technology in a 2013 World Economic Forum study. Ecuador was ranked 113th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. The most notable icons in Ecuadorian sciences are the mathematician and cartographer Pedro Vicente Maldonado, born in Riobamba in 1707, and the printer, independence precursor, and medical pioneer Eugenio Espejo, born in 1747 in Quito. Among other notable Ecuadorian scientists and engineers are Lieutenant Jose Rodriguez Labandera, a pioneer who built the first submarine in Latin America in 1837; Reinaldo Espinosa Aguilar, a botanist and biologist of Andean flora; and José Aurelio Dueñas, a chemist and inventor of a method of textile serigraphy.
The major areas of scientific research in Ecuador have been in the medical fields, tropical and infectious diseases treatments, agricultural engineering, pharmaceutical research, and bioengineering. Being a small country and a consumer of foreign technology, Ecuador has favored research supported by entrepreneurship in information technology. The antivirus program Checkprogram, banking protection system MdLock, and Core Banking Software Cobis are products of Ecuadorian development.

Tourism
Ecuador is a country with vast natural wealth. The diversity of its four regions has given rise to thousands of species of flora and fauna. It has approximately 1,640 kinds of birds. The species of butterflies border 4,500, the reptiles 345, the amphibians 358, and the mammals 258, among others. Ecuador is considered one of the 17 countries where the planet's highest biodiversity is concentrated, being also the largest country with diversity per km2 in the world. Most of its fauna and flora live in 26 protected areas by the state.
The country has two cities with UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Quito and Cuenca, as well as two natural UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Galapagos Islands and Sangay National Park, in addition to one World Biosphere Reserve, such as the Cajas Massif. Culturally, the toquilla straw hat and the culture of the Zapara indigenous people are recognized. The most popular sites for national and foreign tourists have different nuances due to the various tourist activities offered by the country.
Among the main tourist destinations are:

Nature attractions: Galápagos Islands, Yasuni National Park, El Cajas National Park, Sangay National Park, Podocarpus National Park, Vilcabamba, Baños de Agua Santa.
Cultural attractions: Historic center of Quito, Ciudad Mitad del Mundo, Ingapirca, Historic center of Cuenca, Latacunga and its Mama Negra festival.
Snowy mountains: Antisana volcano, Cayambe volcano, Chimborazo volcano, Cotopaxi volcano, Illinizas volcanoes.
Beaches: Atacames, Bahía de Caráquez, Crucita, Esmeraldas, Manta, Montañita, Playas, Salinas

Transport
The rehabilitation and reopening of the Ecuadorian railroad and use of it as a tourist attraction is one of the recent developments in transportation matters.
The roads of Ecuador in recent years have undergone important improvement. The major routes are Pan American (under enhancement from four to six lanes from Rumichaca to Ambato, the conclusion of four lanes on the entire stretch of Ambato and Riobamba and running via Riobamba to Loja). In the absence of the section between Loja and the border with Peru, there are the Route Espondilus or Ruta del Sol (oriented to travel along the Ecuadorian coastline) and the Amazon backbone (which crosses from north to south along the Ecuadorian Amazon, linking most and more major cities of it).
Another major project is developing the road Manta – Tena, the highway Guayaquil – Salinas Highway Aloag Santo Domingo, Riobamba – Macas (which crosses Sangay National Park). Other new developments include the National Unity bridge complex in Guayaquil, the bridge over the Napo river in Francisco de Orellana, the Esmeraldas River Bridge in the city of the same name, and, perhaps the most remarkable of all, the Bahia – San Vincente Bridge, being the largest on the Latin American Pacific coast.
Cuenca's tramway is the largest public transport system in the city and the first modern tramway in Ecuador. It was inaugurated on 8 March 2019. It has 20.4 kilometers (12.7 mi) and 27 stations. It will transport 120,000 passengers daily. Its route starts in the south of Cuenca and ends in the north at the Parque Industrial neighborhood.
The Mariscal Sucre International Airport in Quito and the José Joaquín de Olmedo International Airport in Guayaquil have experienced a high increase in demand and have required modernization. In the case of Guayaquil it involved a new air terminal, once considered the best in South America and the best in Latin America and in Quito where an entire new airport has been built in Tababela and was inaugurated in February 2013, with Canadian assistance. However, the main road leading from Quito city center to the new airport will only be finished in late 2014, making current travelling from the airport to downtown Quito as long as two hours during rush hour. Quito's old city-center airport is being turned into parkland, with some light industrial use.

Demographics
Ecuador's population is ethnically diverse and the 2021 estimates put Ecuador's population at 17,797,737. The largest ethnic group (as of 2010) is the Mestizos, who are mixed race people of Amerindian and European descent, typically from Spanish colonists, and constitute about 71% of the population (although including the Montubio, a term used for coastal Mestizo population, brings this up to about 79%).
The White Ecuadorians are a minority, accounting for 6.1% of the population of Ecuador, and can be found throughout all of Ecuador, primarily around the urban areas. Even though Ecuador's white population during its colonial era were mainly descendants from Spain, today Ecuador's white population is a result of a mixture of European immigrants, predominantly from Spain with people from Italy, Germany, France, and Switzerland who have settled in the early 20th century. In addition, there is a small European Jewish (Ecuadorian Jews) population, who live mainly in Quito and to a lesser extent in Guayaquil. 5,000 Romani people live in Ecuador.
Ecuador also has a small population of Asian origins, mainly those from West Asia, like the economically well off descendants of Lebanese and Palestinian immigrants, who are either Christian or Muslim (see Islam in Ecuador), and an East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.
Amerindians account for 7% of the current population. The mostly rural Montubio population of the coastal provinces of Ecuador, who might be classified as Pardo account for 7.4% of the population.
The Afro-Ecuadorians are a minority population (7%) in Ecuador, that includes the Mulattos and zambos, and are largely based in the Esmeraldas province and to a lesser degree in the predominantly Mestizo provinces of Coastal Ecuador – Guayas and Manabi. In the Highland Andes where a predominantly Mestizo, white and Amerindian population exist, the African presence is almost non-existent except for a small community in the province of Imbabura called Chota Valley.

Largest cities
The five largest cities in the country are Quito (2.78 million inhabitants), Guayaquil (2.72 million inhabitants), Cuenca (636,996 inhabitants), Santo Domingo (458,580 inhabitants), and Ambato (387,309 inhabitants). The most populated metropolitan areas of the country are those of Guayaquil, Quito, Cuenca, Manabí Centro (Portoviejo-Manta) and Ambato.

Immigration and emigration
Ecuador houses a small East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.
In the early years of World War II, Ecuador still admitted a certain number of immigrants, and in 1939, when several South American countries refused to accept 165 Jewish refugees from Germany aboard the ship Koenigstein, Ecuador granted them entry permits.
Migration from Lebanon to Ecuador started as early as 1875. Early impoverished migrants tended to work as independent sidewalk vendors, rather than as wage workers in agriculture or others' businesses. Though they emigrated to escape Ottoman Turkish religious oppression, they were called "Turks" by Ecuadorians because they carried Ottoman passports. There were further waves of immigration in the first half of the 20th century; by 1930, there were 577 Lebanese immigrants and 489 of their descendants residing in the country. A 1986 estimate from Lebanon's Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated 100,000 Lebanese descendants. They reside mostly in Quito and Guayaquil. They are predominantly Roman Catholics.
In the early 1900s, there was immigration from Italians, Germans, Portuguese, French, Britons, Irish and Greeks. The town of Ancón experienced of wave of immigration from the UK starting in 1911, when the Government of Ecuador conceded 98 mines, occupying an area of 38,842 hectares, to the British oil company Anglo Ecuadorian Oilfields. Today, the Anglo American Oilfields or Anglo American plc is the world's largest producer of platinum, with around 40% of world output, as well as being a major producer of diamonds, copper, nickel, iron ore and steelmaking coal. Alberto Spencer is one famed Briton that hailed from Ancon. The town has now become an attraction due to the austere British homes in "El Barrio Ingles" situated in a contrasting tropical setting.
In the 1950s, the Italians were the third largest national group in terms of numbers of immigrants. It can be noted that, after World War I, people from Liguria, still constituted the majority of the flow, even though they then represented only one third of the total number of immigrants in Ecuador. This situation came from the improvement of the economic situation in Liguria. The classic paradigm of the Italian immigrant today was not that of the small trader from Liguria as it had been before; those who emigrated to Ecuador were professionals and technicians, employees and religious people from South-Central Italy. It must be remembered that many immigrants, a remarkable number of Italians among them, moved to the Ecuadorian port from Peru to escape from the Peruvian war with Chile. The Italian government came to be more interested in the emigration phenomenon in Ecuador because of the necessity of finding an outlet for the large number of immigrants who traditionally went to the United States but who could no longer enter this country because of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 that restricted immigration of Southern and Eastern Europeans as well as other "undesirables".
Most of these communities and their descendants are located in the Guayas region of the country.
Throughout the 20th century, immigration also came from other Latin American countries due to civil wars, economic crises, and dictatorships. The most notable are those coming from Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. Starting from 2002, there has been an exponential and significant growth in Colombian and Venezuelan refugees. Colombians have historically found refuge in its neighboring country during times of civil unrest. Recently, Venezuelans have become a notable presence in Ecuadorian cities as many flee the economic and political Venezuelan crisis. Authorities argue that an estimated 350,000 to 400,000 Colombians live in Ecuador, porous borders and lack of formal registration disallow concrete numbers.
From 2007, the Ecuador government created multiple initiatives to attract Ecuadorians abroad mostly from the United States, Italy, and Spain to return after many left during the 90s economic crisis or La Decada Perdida. These policies resulted in the rapid and significant rise in the flow of returning nationals, most notably during the 2008 economic crisis that affected Europe and North America.
In recent years, Ecuador has grown in popularity among North American expatriates.

Language
Spanish is the official language in Ecuador. It is spoken as a first (93%) or second language (6%) by the vast majority of its population. In 1991 Northern Kichwa (Quechua) and other pre-colonial American languages were spoken by 2,500,000. Ethnologues estimate that the country has about 24 living indigenous languages. Among the 24 are Awapit (spoken by the Awá), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Shuar Chicham (spoken by the Shuar), Achuar-Shiwiar (spoken by the Achuar and the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsa'fiki (spoken by the Tsáchila), Paicoca (spoken by the Siona and Secoya), and Wao Tededeo (spoken by the Waorani). Use of these Amerindian languages is gradually diminishing and being replaced by Spanish.
Most Ecuadorians speak Spanish as their first language, with its ubiquity permeating and dominating most of the country. Despite its small size, the country has a marked diversity in Spanish accents that vary widely among regions. Ecuadorian Spanish idiosyncrasies reflect the ethnic and racial populations that originated and settled the distinct areas of the country.
The three main regional variants are:

Equatorial Pacific Spanish or Equatorial Coastal Spanish
Andean Spanish
Amazonic Spanish

Religion
According to the Ecuadorian National Institute of Statistics and Census, 91.95% of the country's population have a religion, 7.94% are atheists and 0.11% are agnostics. Among the people who have a religion, 80.44% are Catholic, 11.30% are Evangelical Protestants, 1.29% are Jehovah's Witnesses and 6.97% other (mainly Jewish, Buddhists and Latter-day Saints).
In the rural parts of Ecuador, Amerindian beliefs and Catholicism are sometimes syncretized into a local form of folk Catholicism. Most festivals and annual parades are based on religious celebrations, many incorporating a mixture of rites and icons.

There is a small number of Eastern Orthodox Christians, Amerindian religions, Muslims (see Islam in Ecuador), Buddhists and Baháʼí. According to their estimates, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accounts for about 1.4% of the population, or 211,165 members at the end of 2012. According to their sources there were 92,752 Jehovah's Witnesses in the country in 2017.
The History of the Jews in Ecuador goes back to the 16th and 17th centuries. Until the 20th century, the majority were Sephardic with many Anusim (Crypto-Jews) among them. Ashkenazi Jews arrived mostly as refugees after the ascendance of National Socialism in Germany in 1933, with 3,000 Jews in Ecuador in 1940. At its peak, in 1950, the Jewish population of Ecuador was estimated at 4,000, but then diminished to some 290 around 2020, forming one of the smallest Jewish communities in South America. Nevertheless, this number is declining because young people leave the country for the United States or Israel. Today, the Jewish Community of Ecuador (Comunidad Judía del Ecuador) has its seat in Quito. There are very small communities in Cuenca. The "Comunidad de Culto Israelita" is the organization that represents the Jews of Guayaquil. This community works independently from the "Jewish Community of Ecuador" and is composed of only 30 people.

Health
The current structure of the Ecuadorian public health care system dates back to 1967. The Ministry of the Public Health (Ministerio de Salud Pública del Ecuador) is the responsible entity of the regulation and creation of the public health policies and health care plans. The Minister of Public Health is appointed directly by the President of the Republic.
The philosophy of the Ministry of Public Health is the social support and service to the most vulnerable population, and its main plan of action lies around communitarian health and preventive medicine. Many American medical groups often conduct medical missions away from the big cities to provide medical health to poor communities.
The public healthcare system allows patients to be treated without an appointment in public general hospitals by general practitioners and specialists in the outpatient clinic (Consulta Externa) at no cost. This is done in the four basic specialties of pediatric, gynecology, clinic medicine, and surgery. There are also public hospitals specialized to treat chronic diseases, target a particular group of the population, or provide better treatment in some medical specialties.
Although well-equipped general hospitals are found in the major cities or capitals of provinces, there are basic hospitals in the smaller towns and canton cities for family care consultation and treatments in pediatrics, gynecology, clinical medicine, and surgery.
Community health care centers (Centros de Salud) are found inside metropolitan areas of cities and in rural areas. These are day hospitals that provide treatment to patients whose hospitalization is under 24 hours.
The doctors assigned to rural communities, where the Amerindian population can be substantial, have small clinics under their responsibility for the treatment of patients in the same fashion as the day hospitals in the major cities. The treatment in this case respects the culture of the community.
The public healthcare system should not be confused with the Ecuadorian Social Security healthcare service, which is dedicated to individuals with formal employment and who are affiliated obligatorily through their employers. Citizens with no formal employment may still contribute to the social security system voluntarily and have access to the medical services rendered by the social security system. The Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security (IESS) has several major hospitals and medical sub-centers under its administration across the nation.
Ecuador currently ranks 20, in most efficient health care countries, compared to 111 back in the year 2000. Ecuadorians have a life expectancy of 77.1 years. The infant mortality rate is 13 per 1,000 live births, a major improvement from approximately 76 in the early 1980s and 140 in 1950. Almost a quarter, or 23%, of children under five are chronically malnourished. Population in some rural areas have no access to potable water, and its supply is provided by mean of water tankers. There are 686 malaria cases per 100,000 people. Basic health care, including doctor's visits, basic surgeries, and basic medications, has been provided free since 2008. However, some public hospitals are in poor condition and often lack necessary supplies to attend the high demand of patients. Private hospitals and clinics are well equipped but still expensive for the majority of the population.
Between 2008 and 2016, new public hospitals have been built. In 2008, the government introduced universal and compulsory social security coverage. In 2015, corruption remains a problem. Overbilling is recorded in 20% of public establishments and in 80% of private establishments.

Education
The Ecuadorian Constitution requires that all children attend school until they achieve a "basic level of education", which is estimated at nine school years. In 1996, the net primary enrollment rate was 96.9%, and 71.8% of children stayed in school until the fifth grade/age 10. The cost of primary and secondary education is borne by the government, but families often face significant additional expenses such as fees and transportation costs.
Provision of public schools falls far below the levels needed, and class sizes are often very large, and families of limited means often find it necessary to pay for education. In rural areas, only 10% of the children go on to high school. In a 2015 report, The Ministry of Education states that in 2014 the mean number of school years completed in rural areas is 7.39 as compared to 10.86 in urban areas.

Culture
Ecuador's dominant culture is defined by its mestizo majority and, like its ancestry, is traditionally of Spanish heritage, influenced in different degrees by Amerindian traditions and in some cases by Spanish elements non-Europeans and Africans. The first and most substantial wave of modern immigration to Ecuador consisted of Spanish colonist, following the arrival of Europeans in 1499. A lower number of other Europeans and North Americans migrated to the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and in smaller numbers, Poles, Lithuanians, English, Irish, Croatians and some cases from Asia during and after the Second World War.
Ecuador's Amerindian communities are integrated into the mainstream culture to varying degrees, but some may also practice their own native cultures, particularly the more remote Amerindian communities of the Amazon basin. Spanish is spoken as the first language by more than 90% of the population and as a first or second language by more than 98%. Part of Ecuador's population can speak Amerindian languages; in some cases, they are used as a second language. Two percent of the population speak only Amerindian languages.

Art
The best known art styles from Ecuador belonged to the Escuela Quiteña (Quito School), which developed from the 16th to 18th centuries, examples of which are on display in various old churches in Quito. Ecuadorian painters include Eduardo Kingman, Oswaldo Guayasamín, and Camilo Egas from the Indiginist Movement; Manuel Rendón, Jaime Zapata, Enrique Tábara, Aníbal Villacís, Theo Constanté, Luis Molinari, Araceli Gilbert, Judith Gutiérrez, Félix Aráuz, and Estuardo Maldonado from the Informalist Movement; Teddy Cobeña from expressionism and figurative style and Luis Burgos Flor with his abstract, futuristic style. The Amerindian people of Tigua, Ecuador, are also world-renowned for their traditional paintings.

Literature
Early literature in colonial Ecuador, as in the rest of Spanish America, was influenced by the Spanish Golden Age. One of the earliest examples is Jacinto Collahuazo, an Amerindian chief of a northern village in today's Ibarra, born in the late 1600s. Despite the early repression and discrimination of the native people by the Spanish, Collahuazo learned to read and write in Castilian, but his work was written in Quechua. The use of Quipu was banned by the Spanish, and in order to preserve their work, many Inca poets had to resort to the use of the Latin alphabet to write in their native Quechua language. The history behind the Inca drama "Ollantay", the oldest literary piece in existence for any Amerindian language in America, shares some similarities with the work of Collahuazo. Collahuazo was imprisoned and all of his work burned. The existence of his literary work came to light many centuries later, when a crew of masons was restoring the walls of a colonial church in Quito and found a hidden manuscript. The salvaged fragment is a Spanish translation from Quechua of the "Elegy to the Dead of Atahualpa", a poem written by Collahuazo, which describes the sadness and impotence of the Inca people of having lost their king Atahualpa.
Other early Ecuadorian writers include the Jesuits Juan Bautista Aguirre, born in Daule in 1725, and Father Juan de Velasco, born in Riobamba in 1727. Famous authors from the late colonial and early republic period include Eugenio Espejo, a printer and main author of the first newspaper in Ecuadorian colonial times; Jose Joaquin de Olmedo (born in Guayaquil), famous for his ode to Simón Bolívar titled Victoria de Junin; Juan Montalvo, a prominent essayist and novelist; Juan Leon Mera, famous for his work "Cumanda" or "Tragedy among Savages" and the Ecuadorian National Anthem; Juan A. Martinez with A la Costa; Dolores Veintimilla; and others.
Contemporary Ecuadorian writers include the novelist Jorge Enrique Adoum; the poet Jorge Carrera Andrade; the essayist Benjamín Carrión; the poets Medardo Angel Silva, Jorge Carrera Andrade, Emanuel Xavier and Luis Alberto Costales; the novelist Enrique Gil Gilbert; the novelist Jorge Icaza (author of the novel Huasipungo, translated to many languages); the short story author Pablo Palacio; and the novelist Alicia Yanez Cossio.

Music
The music of Ecuador has a long history. Pasillo is a genre of indigenous Latin music. In Ecuador it is the "national genre of music". Through the years, many cultures have brought their influences together to create new types of music. There are also different kinds of traditional music like albazo, pasacalle, fox incaico, tonada, capishca, Bomba (highly established in Afro-Ecuadorian societies), and so on. Tecnocumbia and Rockola are clear examples of the influence of foreign cultures. One of the most traditional forms of dancing in Ecuador is Sanjuanito. It is originally from northern Ecuador (Otavalo-Imbabura). Sanjuanito is a type of dance music played during festivities by the mestizo and Amerindian communities. According to the Ecuadorian musicologist Segundo Luis Moreno, Sanjuanito was danced by Amerindian people during San Juan Bautista's birthday. This important date was established by the Spaniards on 24 June, coincidentally the same date when Amerindian people celebrated their rituals of Inti Raymi.

Media
Cuisine
Ecuadorian cuisine is diverse, varying with the altitude, associated agricultural and environmental conditions, and ethnic/racial communities. Most regions in Ecuador follow the traditional three-course meal of soup: a course that includes rice and a protein, and then dessert and coffee to finish. Agricultural products from the plantations of the Costa, Sierra, and Oriente regions are bananas, cocoa beans, coffee, sugar, potatoes, corn, barley, rice, wheat, and tropical fruits.
In the coastal region, seafood is prevalent, with prepared fish, shrimps, and ceviche being an integral part of the diet. Beef is also notably consumed in the coastal region; traditional dishes are churrasco and arroz con menestra y carne asada (rice with beans and grilled beef) served with fried plantain. The latter is an emblematic dish of the city of Guayaquil. Meat-based dishes have their origins in the cattle ranching culture of the Montubio people.
Ceviche is a staple coastal dish with pre-Incan origins. It is often served with fried plantain (chifle or patacones), popcorn, or tostado. Plantain- and peanut-based dishes are quite frequent in the coastal region, reflecting the West African roots of many of its citizens. Encocados (dishes that contain a coconut sauce) are also very popular in the northern coast, centering around the city of Esmeraldas. The coast is also a leading producer of bananas, cocoa beans, prepared fish, shrimps, tilapia, mango, and passion fruit, among other tropical fruits.
Pan de yuca, analogous with the Brazilian pão de queijo, is served with yogur persa and is often eaten as a snack in many coastal cities. Its origin comes from the Persian and Arab populations that settled on the coastal regions of Ecuador and Argentina. In the Amazon region, a dietary staple is the yuca, elsewhere called cassava. Many fruits are available in this region, including bananas, tree grapes, and peach palms.
In the highland region, various dishes of pork, chicken, and cuy (guinea pig) are popular, and are usually served with a variety of grains (especially rice, mote, and potatoes). The consumption of cuy is prevalent among the Indigenous peoples of Ecuador, and reflects the predominantly native character of the highlands.

Sports
The most popular sport in Ecuador, as in most South American countries, is football. Its best known professional teams include; Emelec from Guayaquil, Liga De Quito from Quito; Barcelona S.C. from Guayaquil, Independiente del Valle from Sangolqui, the most popular team in Ecuador, also the team with most local championships; Deportivo Quito, and El Nacional from Quito; Olmedo from Riobamba; and Deportivo Cuenca from Cuenca. Currently the most successful football team in Ecuador is LDU Quito, and it is the only Ecuadorian team that has won the Copa Libertadores; they were also runners-up in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup. The Estadio Monumental Isidro Romero Carbo is the tenth largest football stadium in South America. The Ecuador national football team has appeared at five FIFA World Cups.

See also
Outline of Ecuador

Notes
References
Further reading
External links

President of Ecuador (in Spanish)
CIA Library Site: Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Ecuador. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Ecuador at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Ecuador profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Ecuador
 Geographic data related to Ecuador at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Ecuador
Ecuador is a nation in northwest South America known as the Republic of Ecuador. Hundreds of thousands of kinds of plants and animals can be found there as a result of the diversity of its four zones. There are roughly 1640 bird species there. Along with the 4,500 kinds of butterflies, there are also 345 reptiles, 358 amphibians, and 258 mammals. Ecuador is regarded as one of the 17 nations with the highest concentration of biodiversity on Earth. The majority of its animals and plants are found in 26 state-protected areas. It also provides gastronomy, a range of cultures and customs, and historical attractions like Quito.
Ecuador is crossed from north to south by a volcanic section of Andes 70  volcanos, being the higher the Chimborazo, with 6310 m West of the Andes is the Gulf of Guayaquil and a wooded plain; at east, the Amazon. It is the country with the highest concentration of rivers per square kilometer in the world. In the Ecuadorian territory, which includes the Galápagos Islands 1000 km west of the coast, lies the densest biodiversity in the planet.
The Ministry of Information and Tourism was created on August 10, 1992, at beginning of the government of Sixto Durán Ballén, who envisioned at tourism as a key activity for the economic and social development of peoples. Compared with the growth of the tourism sector in June 1994, was taken the decision to separate tourism of information, to be devoted exclusively to promote and strengthen this activity.

Statistics
In 2024 about 1.3 million foreign tourists visited the country (2018: 2.5 million).

Tourist attractions
Nature and biodiversity
Galápagos Islands
The Galápagos Islands (officially Colón Archipelago) are an archipelago located in the Pacific Ocean 972 km off the coast of Ecuador. It consists of 13 large volcanic islands, 6 smaller islands and 107 rocks and islets, distributed around the line of terrestrial equator. The Galápagos Archipelago is one of the largest scientific and tourist attractions of Ecuador; undoubtedly, it is the most known and famous attraction of the country.
Currently, the number of visitors to the Galápagos reaches about 200 000 tourists per year.
Administratively, the islands are a province of Ecuador, whose capital is Puerto Baquerizo Moreno (officially, also is called Insular Region of Ecuador). On 12 February 1832, under the presidency of Juan José Flores, the Galápagos Islands were annexed to Ecuador. Since February 18, 1973, they constitute a province of Ecuador.
It is estimated that the formation of the first island took place more than 5 million years ago, as a result of tectonic activity. The most recent islands, called Isabela and Fernandina, are still in process of formation, the most recent volcanic eruption in 2009 has been recorded.
The Galápagos Islands are famous for its numerous endemic species and Charles Darwin studies that led him to establish his Theory of Evolution by natural selection. Are called touristically, the «Enchanted Islands» as the flora and fauna found there is virtually unique and it can not be found anywhere else in the world. That is why many people visit them to know and enjoy the animals and unique plants.
The Galápagos were declared National Park in 1959, protecting 97.5% of the land area of the archipelago. The remaining area is occupied by human settlements that already existed at the time of the declaration. By then, about 1000-2000 people lived in four islands. In 1972, a census found that 3488 people lived in Galápagos, but in 1980 this number had dramatically increased to more than 20,000.
In 1986 the sea surrounding the islands was declared marine reserve. UNESCO included at Galápagos in the list of World Heritage in 1978, and in December 2001 this declaration was extended to the marine reserve.
In 2007, it were included in the list of List of World Heritage in Danger, due to mass tourism and invasive species. The July 29, 2010, the Galapagos Islands were removed from the list of endangered heritage by the Heritage Committee of UNESCO.
The archipelago has different international figures that have been implemented to try to ensure the conservation of Galápagos; including: reserve of world natural heritage, Ramsar site, whale sanctuary, biosphere reserve, etc.
The Global Strategy for Nature Conservation identifies to Galápagos as a priority biogeographic province for the establishment of protected areas.
Nationally the figures of national park and marine reserve, reflect the commitment of the Ecuadorian government to preserve this important legacy for future generations of Galapaguians, Ecuadorians and humanity in general

Baños de Agua Santa
Baños de Agua Santa is famous for being one of the cities that most attracts tourists in the Ecuador, is at 3 hours south of Quito. Is strategically located in the center of Ecuador, between the Andes and the Ecuadorian Amazon, has a wet mild spring weather throughout the year, with an average temperature of 18  °C, is at an altitude of 1,820 m on the slopes of Tungurahua volcano. The WWF gave the nominative at Baños "A Gift to the Earth". It is Ecuador's "outdoors capital" with some 15 activities and attractions. Situated between Sangay and Llangantes national parks,
It is also known as "The Gate of El Dorado" And "A Bit of Heaven" also offers many attractions: It can visit the Basilica of the Virgin of Rosario de Agua Santa, it can visit different waterfalls, ascend to Tungurahua (taking precautions because it is a volcano in eruptive activity), taste melcochas (sweet made from sugar cane), there are varieties of handicrafts made in balsa and tagua.
Baños de Agua Santa is a suitable place to practice various adventure sports such as city: rafting, kayaking, canyoning, rock climbing, bungee jumping, horseback riding, nature walks, canopy, mountain biking, etc. Has 5 municipal spas with mineral and sulphurous waters ranging from cold of 18 °C until the hot of 55   °C; emerging from the bowels of the Tungurahua volcano. It has a Pink Zone where more than 30 clubs, bars and discos gives tourists a fun and safe environment. In this city it can access more than 80 restaurants with varied local and international cuisine.
The main tourist attractions that include are:

Santa Clara Spa (Balneario de Santa Clara)
Las Peñas o Modernas Spa
De la Virgen Pools
El Salado Pools
Inés María Waterfall
Cabellera de la Virgen Waterfall
Ulba Waterfall
Chamana Waterfall
Bascún Waterfall
Agoyán Waterfall
El Manto de la Novia Waterfall
El Fantasma and El Placer Waterfalls
San Pedro Waterfall
El Corazón Waterfall
Encañonado del Duende Waterfall
Pailón del Diablo Waterfall in Rio Verde
Manto del Ángel Waterfall
Machay Waterfall
Las Orquídeas Waterfall
San Agustín Waterfall
Parrots Refuge Waterfall
San Miguel Waterfall
Peñón del Tucán Waterfall
Manantial el Dorado Waterfall
San Francisco and Refugio del Gallo de la Peña Waterfalls
El Mayordomo
Baños Zoo and Aquarium
Cerro Hermoso
Llanganates National Park
Sangay National Park

Yasuní National Park
The Yasuni National Park is a National Park that extends over an area of 9820 square kilometers in the provinces of Pastaza and Orellana between Napo River and Curaray River in the Amazon basin about 250 kilometers southeast of Quito. The park primarily sylvan was designated by the UNESCO in 1989 as Biosphere Reserve and is part of the territory where Huaorani village is situated. Two Huao factions, Tagaeri and Taromenane are uncontacted groups.
It is located in areas of the basins of the rivers Tiputini, Yasuní, Nashiño, Cononaco and Curaray, tributaries of the Napo River, who in turn flows into the Amazon. The park is horseshoe-shaped and extends from the south of the Napo River and north of Curaray river, extending the middle basin of Tivacuno River According to a recent study  the Yasuní National Park and the underlying magnified area are considered the most biodiverse place on the planet for its richness in amphibians, birds, mammals and plants.
Significantly, the Ecuadorian Amazon region is rich in oilfields and the oil economy is the pillar on which the economy of Ecuador is held from the 1970s. Given this in the year 1998, the government of Jamil Mahuad declared the southern part of YNP intangible area, to protect uncontacted peoples and preserve the biosphere reserve away from the oilfields. Since 2007 about YNP it has made a proposal called Iniciativa ITT to keep the oil underground by applying a type of international economic compensation, which could not materialize.
Yasuní is one of the most biodiverse areas of the Earth, studies talk about 150 species of amphibians, 121 reptiles, 598 species of birds, 169 (confirmed) and 204 (estimated) of mammals and in flora have been identified 2113 species and are estimated to exist around 3100.
The term Yasuní, without knowing its linguistic origin, means "sacred land" as is interpreted broadly by communities in the area.

Cuyabeno Wildlife Reserve
The Cuyabeno Wildlife Reserve is situated in the Province of Sucumbíos, in the northeast of the Amazon Region. It is a place with great biodiversity, home to one of the largest concentrations of wildlife, both plant and wildlife. A complex system of wet formations, 13 lakes, rivers and tropical forests that make the 603,000 hectares a record for the highest levels of biodiversity in the world.
The Cuyabeno has more than 550 different bird species; 60 species of orchid s; over 350 species of fish; a variety of reptiles such as anacondas, alligators and river turtles. Are estimated at 12 000 plant species found within the reserve. And many species of mammals, including the tapir (Tapirus terrestris). The reserve is also home to rare species such as the river pink dolphin, the Hoatzin and Harpy Eagle of the region, with its wingspan of 2 meters.
The Cuyabeno Wildlife Reserve watershed was originally proposed by an FAO study on potential protected areas in 1976 and later declared as an area of 155,000 hectares based on the field word of Dr. Daan Vreugdenhil. In 1986 it was extended to the border with Peru, covering 594.950 hectares, based on the work of Dr. Daan Vreugdenhil and Dr. Flavio Coello.
The Cuyabeno Wildlife Reserve belongs to National System of Protected Areas, under the mandate of the Ministry of Environment of Ecuador, that regulates tourism in the area. As the areas is remote and large, visitors need to spend several days in the area. They can stay overnight in lodges of licensed tour operators, the first of which was the Cuyabeno Lodge, founded in 1988 by Dr. Daan Vreugdenhil and Dr. Tjite de Vries to facilitate ecotourism to the area. When the area was invaded by small farmers, both biologists were concerned that the conservation of such a large area could not politically be justified unless so it would generate income. As years progressed other lodges were built and currently about a dozen lodges operate around the Cuyabeno Lake and another few operate along the Aguarico River. Before Covid, Cuyabeno was visited by about 12,000 per year, which is well within the carrying capacity of this enormous areas.
It is a tropical forest, with rainfall between fluctuates around 3000 mm per year, and humidity between 85 and 95%. From December through March is a pronounced dry season; the rainy season is from April to July and from August to November rainfall is moderate. The annual temperature is around 25 °C.
Many ethnic communities living on the banks of two major rivers, the Cuyabeno River and Aguarico River, in particular, the Cofanes and the Siona-Secoya, both legendary in this area. The Siona community inhabits the northern part of the reserve of Cuyabeno in Puerto Bolivar and Tarapuy River.

El Cajas National Park
El Cajas National Park is located in the Andes, south of Ecuador, in the province of Azuay, 33 km northwest of the city of Cuenca. The most common access to the park start every in Cuenca: From there, the road Cuenca-Molleturo crosses in control of Surocucho in just over 30 minutes away; later, this road passes on the banks of the lagoon La Toreadora where are the Administrative Center and Park Information. Following long to Molleturo, in this way known the northern sector of El Cajas and winds through several major and minor lagoons.
To access the park from the coast, the Molleturo-Cuenca route is also the best choice.
With the basic framework of a moorer ecosystem in the park, there are 232 distinct lagoons located on its broad valleys; Among the most important are Lagartococha, Osohuaycu, Mamamag or Taitachungo, Quinoascocha, La Toreadora, Sunincocha, Cascarillas, Ventanas and Tinguishcocha. This lot of lagoons regulates and maintains the streams in the area through its drainage; rivers such as the Tomebamba, the Mazán, the Yanuncay and Migüir born in El Cajas and supply drinking water to the city of Cuenca; Its are, at the same time, major contributors of Paute Hydroelectric Complex, which provides electricity to most of the country.
On the heights of the Western Range of the Andes, west of the city of Cuenca, is El Cajas National Park, mainly formed by large elevations stored inside lake systems interconnected by way of huge boxes, is hence its name Cajas (Boxes). In the area there is not a marked regularity of climate; They are given frequent frosts and there permanent presence of showers (drizzle) and fog.
On the eastern edge of the park it erects a Rainforest Subalpine (SA-rf), mainly composed of tree and shrub species diversity of orchids, ferns and mosses. Stands the formation of forest Polylepis, qiwuña, "quinoa" or "árbol de papel", which has between 8 and 10 m high and it grows on the banks of lagoons or streams and rocky places and is the only species of tree above 4000 m. In the western boundary abound woodble species.
Are whitetail deer, spectacled bear, puma, ocelots, páramo deer, páramo rabbits and andean tapir. The most important birds are the caracara, the condor, the andean toucan, ducks and hummingbirds. The water mouse of Cajas is an endemic species of the park. Like the northern El Ángel Ecological Reserve, the lagoons in El Cajas are recognized and very popular for its trouts.
Attractions:
Lagartococha Lagoon: On its shores there is camping and the place is very busy with sport fishing. Beside Lagartococha it lies the "Cave of the Deaths".
Avilahuayco: serves as a natural lookout or watchtower; the panorama offered from the summit is very attractive because from there are observed "the boxes" that dominate the whole area.
Loma de Tres Cruces: It is one of the highest parts of the park where is the water divide between those who go to the lies Amazon and advancing towards the Pacific. El García Moreno Road crosses there and tradition tells that owes its name to the many dead who sought the place overnight trip from the coast, but the intense cold of the night failed to see the sunrise.
 Taitachungo Lagoon (Mamamag):  Starting from La Toreadora are some trails that lead to it. From here it can follow a stretch of Ingañán or Inca Trail to the Luspa Cave. In Mamamag it found other traces of pre-Inca constructions represented by stone steps and foundation of any type of building, presumably rooms for the night; more than housing, these buildings seem to have served as inns, lodges trip, since the site is a key step towards the coast.

Cotopaxi National Park
Cotopaxi National Park is a protected area, located on the border of the provinces of Pichincha, Cotopaxi and Napo  in Ecuador, which includes in its space Cotopaxi Volcano.
Its ecosystem hosts several arboreal species, especially pine, which turns the place into a unique site in South America because more reminiscent of an alpine forest than an Andean forest.
The park is connected to Quito by Pan-American Highway, four-lane, which allows travel from the city to the park in about an hour and a quarter. An alternative is the train, which also departs from Quito, and it takes an hour and a half to get to Park Station, another alternative would be entering the town of Machachi, addressing the neighborhood Santa Ana del Pedregal, where it can visit some inns.
It has an area of 3400–5897 masl. Its temperature ranges from 0  °C to 20   °C; with an annual average rainfall of 500–1500 mm.
There are many thick forests and the rest has been destroyed by fire or to plant grasses. There are extensive páramoland with páramo straw that is the dominant grass in the region as it ascends appear representative plants as chuquiraga, alchemilla, colonies of plants in the form of pads, mosses, lichens, romelio, quishuar or tree god, mortiño.
Fauna: wolves, pumas, bears, deer, rabbits, condors, wild horses and foxes.
Geology: natural lagoons, trails, Cotopaxi snowy.
Infrastructure: huts, high mountain center, camp center, community center, shelter for mountaineers.
Archaeology: Ruins of citadel of the Puruhá.
Astronomy: Center for Integrated Survey of Natural Resources by Remote Sensing (CLIRSEN)

Quilotoa Volcano
Quilotoa it is a water-filled boiler and the westernmost volcano in the Ecuadorian Andes. The 3-km-wide boiler was formed by the collapse of this dacite volcano following a catastrophic eruption 800 years ago, which produced pyroclastic flows and lahars that reached the Pacific Ocean, and spread in the air a deposit of volcanic ash along the northern Andes. The boiler has accumulated a depth of 250 m crater lake, which has a greenish color as a result of dissolved minerals. Vents are on the bottom of the lake and hot springs occur on the eastern flank of the volcano.
Quilotoa is an increasingly visited tourist site. The route of the "cumbre" (the small town of Quilotoa) is usually traveled in a hired truck or by bus from the town of Zumbahua 17 km south. Visitors must pay two dollars each to look from the edge of the boiler. A series of simple Hostels have developed in the immediate area, and offer services such as mules and guides to five-hour hike around the boiler (whose diameter is about 9 km), half hour hike down (and 02.01 hours walk back to the ascent of 400 vertical meters) and very basic accommodation in its bowl. Camping is permitted at the bottom of the crater, but no drinking water (except half-liter bottles sold at the lodge), and only one toilet well, located in the hostel.

Podocarpus National Park
The Podocarpus National Park is a National Park located in the provinces of Loja and Zamora Chinchipe, in the south east of Ecuador . It was established the December 15 of 1982. The park is an area of mega diversity and a high degree of endemism due to its location between diverse biological systems.
It extends over 146  280 [[km2]]; in both foothills of the Eastern Range of the Andes until the basins of the rivers Nangaritza, Numbala and Loyola. About 85% of the park is in the province of Zamora Chinchipe and about 15% in the province of Loja.
The national park was established to protect the largest forest in romerillos in the country, consisting of three species of the genus Podocarpus the only conifer native of Ecuador.
Within the park it has developed a unique biological environment, especially represented by the only birds in the area.
Podocarpus National Park is home to a complex of more than 100 lakes, one of the best known are the El Compadre Lagoon. There are also waterfalls, canyons and various kinds of mammals and plants.
To access the park there are two entrances main corresponding to its biogeographic zones, one is in the Cajanuma Sector 'in the upper biogeographic zone. The other is in the Bombuscaro Sector, corresponding to Bombuscaro river in the lower biogeographic zone. In addition, there are two alternative accesses in the high biogeographic zone of the province of Zamora Chinchipe, one is in the Romerillos Sector, corresponding to Jamboé river and other less known entering the Cerro Toledo from the Yangana-Valladolid route.
The park has an exceptional flora, it has been considered the Botanical Garden of America as it is located in the territory where overlap the centers of endemism in the northern Andes and Tumbes.
In its ecosystems of montane rain forests and lower montane, located in the Nudo de Sabanilla, as well as very wet montane and pre-montane forests in the basin Numbala river, there are over 4000 plant species among which stand trees that can measure up to 40 meters as the romerillo, which the park is named, and many other valuable as the cascarilla, called the national tree of Ecuador, and an so many varieties of orchids.
There are specific differences between the vegetation of the moors of the area and the north of the country, basically because they are lower, on the crests of the mountains and in the transition zone of a true moor that does not develop fully, because of the low-lying terrain. Among the main species found in the region are ragwort, laurel, Aguacolla, uvilla, black elderberry, pumamaqui, sapan, myrtle, cashoco, alder, acacia, sage, white guato, cedar, castor, walnut, yumbingue and sluice.
There are over 560 species of birds recorded in the park. This represents 40% of the birds of Ecuador and 6% of world birds. Therefore, it is noted as an important area for birds conservation. There are also 46 species of mammals including spectacled bear
(Tremarctos ornatus), andean tapir (Tapirus pinchaque), common marsupial mouse (Caenolestes fuliginosus), smelly fox (striped hog-nosed skunk), dwarf deer (Pudu mephistophiles).
To visit this place there are four trails: Oso de Anteojos of 400  m with a moderate slope and easily accessible; the cloud forest, 750 m; El Mirador 1.5  km are medium level. Also being for day trips, the circuit I could continue down the path El Mirador with a distance of 3.5 km. To return to the refuge, but some parts of this trail are difficult, so it requires extra caution on the road. In addition, there are long trails where camping is necessary.
Loja is the closest city with airport, but Zamora is also nearby. Loja takes 25–40 minutes to reach to 3 of the 4 entrances, and two hours to reach the Vilcabamba entrance.

Mindo
Mindo is a parish located in the north of Ecuador and one of the two Parish of San Miguel de Los Bancos canton in the province of Pichincha, about 80 km northwest of Quito.
The parish center is a small village located at 1250 m high, the region as a whole has about 2500 inhabitants engaged in livestock, agriculture, and tourism. The temperature in the area ranges between 15 °C - 24 °C throughout the year. The rains are common, but during the months of June to November the weather becomes drier.
Mindo is especially renowned for its natural environment that call for nature lovers attracted by its flora and fauna. It is located in a valley, of which some 19,000 hectares are protected in what is called the Bosque Protector Mindo Nambillo ecosystem in which live about 500 varieties of birds and 90 species of butterflies. Also in the reserve park of Mindo have been identified over 170 species of orchids and abundant bromeliads, heliconias, ferns, vines, mosses and lichens.
Between 2001 and 2002 Mindo was world player by the mobilization and protest activities of locals and environmentalists, within Ecuador and in various countries in Europe, USA, India and Australia, to prevent the construction of an oil pipeline by the OCP Ecuador SA now affecting the region since such activities were not successful  Despite opposition from locals and environmentalists the pipeline was built and began operations in November 2003 and until 2010 carried approximately 375 million barrels of heavy oil of several oil companies that have activities in Ecuador as reported by the company mentioned.

Culture and history
Historic Center of Quito
San Francisco de Quito, is the city capital of the country and also of the province of Pichincha is also head of the metropolitan area that form, known as Metropolitan District of Quito
It is located on the basin of Guayllabamba on the eastern slopes of the stratovolcano active Pichincha, in the western part of the Andes. It is located approximately in the coordinates 0°11′S 78°29′W and its average altitude is 2850 m
The city is divided into 32 parishes., Which are divided into sections 
The date of his first foundation is uncertain; the oldest records are in the Inga estate, however, is used the Spanish conquest of the city, the 6 December 1534, as its birth 
The modern structure mixes with the colonial where domestic residents and foreign visitors always find a place to work, enjoy and remember. In addition, the city is surrounded by volcanoes Pichincha, Antisana, Cotopaxi and Cayambe that make up the Andean contour majestic. Quito is full of meanings that identify and define, occupies hillsides or down to the valleys, winds through alleys and opens in wide avenues; zigzags, avoiding hills and ravines. For this physical beauty, its traditions, corners of mysticism and current legends, is considered "Reliquary of Art in America." These were the main features that in November 1978, Quito was declared by UNESCO "World Cultural Heritage".
In recent years tourism has grown tremendously in the city and has meant a new item in capital inflows. Most foreign visitors come from Quito belong to US and generally are young population, whose average age does not reach 28 years. Europeans also visit the city from Italy, France or Germany. A few years ago most tourists who stayed in city a few days they did because their main destination was the Galápagos Islands but now that has changed. Among the main annotations highlighting tourists are the kindness of the Quito people, the majesty of a full of snow-capped volcanoes landscape, and the cold wet mountain, which strange for foreigners because it is accompanied by a very low thermal sensation especially at night.
In the year 2008 Quito, it began in the travel section of the New York Times. This newspaper published the traditional list of 53 cities that Americans could visit, Quito for the first time was included. The website of the newspaper presented Quito as one of the best and most desirable tourist destinations in the world. "Tourism growth was 12% per annum, while the average before 2002 was of only 8%", says a publication of the Council. The capital lives its fiestas and heir to a rich history and culture, showing his legacy to those who travel.
Moreover, at the turn of Quito in the media, "Passport to Latin America with Samantha Brown" which premiered in the summer and continues into the air was perhaps the greatest achievement in television for the city. Samantha Brown told the Ecuador is "the perfect place to visit when it want to discover South America." The city also hosted a team of US channels CBS and NBC recently. Also it has received tremendously enthusiastic publications like Condé Nast Traveller, Frommer's 'Top Destinations for 2008', the Nexos magazine of the American Airlines, the Geographical magazine, the San Francisco Chronicle daily, and the German magazine Merian among others.

City Middle of the World
The Ciudad Mitad del Mundo is a land owned by the prefecture of the province of Pichincha, Ecuador. It is located in the parish of San Antonio of Quito Metropolitan District, north of downtown Quito.
In the field it built the headquarters of Union of South American Nations which is also the Ethnographic Museum Mitad del Mundo, a museum about the ethnography indigenous from Ecuador. Between 1979 and 1982 was built a monument of 30 meters high to mark the spot where it was believed that the equator facing the country at the time. In fact, a list was drawn from the center of the staircase leading to the east, across the square to mark the Ecuador.
But really the whole structure is 240 m south of the real equator, which was not located until recently, by the occurrence of GPS technology.
The pyramidal monument, with each side facing a cardinal direction, is topped by a globe of 4.5 m in diameter and 5 tons. Inside the monument there is a small museum that displays elements of indigenous culture of Ecuador, such as clothing, descriptions of the various ethnic groups, and samples of their activities. Mitad del Mundo has other attractions as a Planetarium, and in the Central Plaza are held several musical and cultural performances. A small town around the monument around the Ethnographic Museum acts as a tourist center, offering a replica of a Spanish colonial city called "Ciudad Mitad del Mundo".

Historical Center of Cuenca
Cuenca is a city of south central of the country, is the capital of province of Azuay and of the Región 6. Is located in the southern part of the Ecuadorian Andes. Its Historic Center was declared World Heritage by UNESCO in 1999. It is called the "Athens of Ecuador" for its majestic architecture, its cultural diversity, its contribution to the Ecuadorian arts, sciences and letters and for being the birthplace of many famous people of the Ecuadorian society. Handmade hats are a specialty in Ecuador and sold to tourists from around the world who visit Cuenca.

In the center of the city are located important historical remains: museums and old churches (including the Cathedral of the Inmaculada Concepción, one of the largest of America, and others dating from the 16th and 17th centuries), paved streets and houses with facades of Republican style who point the different European influences with characteristic balconies and artistically carved ceilings and other forged in brass painted.
The city is also known as the "Cuenca of the Andes" or the "Athens of Ecuador" for being the birthplace of poets and illustrious men who have left high the name of this city, as Miguel Vélez, Gaspar Sangurima, Santo Hermano Miguel, Honorato Vázquez, Remigio Crespo Toral, among other characters as Abdón Calderón Garaicoa, Antonio Borrero. In Cuenca there are also many cultural organizations.
It also boasts a wide variety of cultural and traditional throughout the year as the fiesta of Corpus Christi which is held in June and the Feast of All Souls to be held in Ecuador at National level the November 2 and one festival with the festivities on November 3 during the holiday commemorating independence, also a sponsored by the City in a contest  it choose to the "Chola cuencana" of the year who will chair the Foundation of the same name, entity that promotes various social projects in rural parishes. Another great festival tradition is the Pase del Niño Viajero that takes place on December 24 in the streets of the historic center (although many people also do so during the course of the months of December and January, arriving in sometimes until February), in which children dressed as characters from the Bible, pastors, overseers, cholas, gypsies, and others, through the streets, organized by families, educational communities, neighborhood, religious and parochial.
Cuenca has the thermal waters of Baños de Cuenca, with typical food, roasted guinea pig. For nightlife Calle larga has many bars, clubs, lodges and cybercafes. It is also advisable to visit the barranco (canyon) where it can appreciate the Tomebamba River, neighboring cantons as Chordeleg known for its jewelry, Gualaceo with its unique landscapes and delight its typical food, Girón with its waterfall.

Ingapirca archaeological complex
The fortress of Ingapirca is the most important archaeological construction of Ecuador, of Inca origin, is located in the province of Cañar, at 3,120 meters above sea level and 16 km from the Cañar city. It is an observatory of the sun and moon.
Ingapirka is a Quechua word which means  Wall of the Inca. It is a truly Inca construction, even though this name was used to designate various pre-Hispanic ruins, without necessarily originate has to do with the Inca culture.
The ensemble of Ingapirca archaeological, is known since the mid-18th century, and the Cañar valley where are these sites, it was called in the 16th century as a province of Hatun Cañar (Quechua:  Hatun Kañar ).
Fray Gaspar de Gallegos, parish priest of Sant Francisco Pueleusi of Azogue, wrote in 1582:
" It is generally called the cañares because three leguas from here's a town called Hatum Cañar that means in the Inca language" The largest province of the cañares "and there say that in time of the Inca Huayna Cápac were large populations of Indians and that there was the main head of these cañares, and it seems, because today there are large and very sumptuous buildings, among them a strong tower ... "
It is not known for certain what were the purposes for which it was built this building of origin Inca-Carari, the only criterion on which coincide several historians and archaeologists is that it was built under the exclusive orders of Huayna Cápac, during campaigns of conquest that her father Túpac Yupanqui, began years ago, to the territories that now comprise southern Ecuador.
Apparently it played a major role in the Inca military strategies, as outpost and supply of troops to the north of Ecuador, but his most important goal was that of being a place of worship and veneration of the sun, the most Inca God, thus becoming in a Coricancha, dedicated to Inca ritual.

Guayaquil 

Despite being a predominantly commercial and business city in the country, it also has well known featured tourist places not only for Ecuador but also for South America, these places are the El Malecón 2000 and the biggest park of Ecuador, the Sports and Ecological Parque Samanes of Guayaquil

Historic center of Loja
Loja, located in the eastern part of the province of Loja, in the south of the country. Is the Capital of province and Canton counterparts. Loja has a rich tradition in the arts, and for this reason is known as the Musical and Cultural Capital of Ecuador. The city is home to two major universities: the National University of Loja, founded in 1859 by the Federal Government of Loja is the oldest university in functions in the country  after the Central University of Ecuador (Quito) HISTORIA UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL DE LOJA, and the Technical University of Loja, founded in 1971, is the third in university population Universidad Técnica Particular de Loja - universidades ecuatorianas segun numero de estudiantes.
The city has great touristic interest because of its art and culture, which can be felt mainly in its Historic Center, knowing that also is surrounded by towns with rich tradition as Saraguro and Vilcabamba. That is why it is ranked as one of the main tourist destinations by Ecuadorians and Peruvians, for it has hotel infrastructure that every major city needs for its visitors, being the third city with the highest number of luxury hotels and hostels around Ecuador after Quito and Guayaquil.

Museum of the Central Bank
Located in the historic center of the city of Loja, near the central square, is the Museum of the Central Bank. It contains the archaeological, historical and colonial history of the province and the city of Loja. There are seven rooms of the museum, every detail a different aspect of the area: the lobby, archeology, nature, the colonial period, the 19th century, important people of Loja, and arts and crafts.

Conceptas Mothers Museum
This is in a 17th-century convent, belonging to the colonial era. The museum contains pictures, household utensils, and tools used by the nuns of self-flagellation. It also houses a collection of works of colonial religious art.

Archaeological Museum
Opened in 2004, the Archaeological Museum houses some 1,600 artifacts, many of which are from the pre-Columbian period. There are three floors of the museum, organized by age of the artifacts. On the first floor Paleolithic and Neolithic artifacts and remains of the Valdivia culture. The second floor contains la Tolita artifacts, Jamás Coaque, Bahía and Guajala cultures. The third floor exhibits items of the Carchi, Imbabura, Panzaleo, Puruhuá, Casholoma, Tacalshapa, Manteña, Late, Milagro, Quevedo, Huancavilca, and Inca cultures.

Music Museum of Pío Jaramillo Alvarado Cultural Center
Located at Bernardo Valdivieso street, in the Historic Center, opened in 2004, the museum houses exhibitions about the musical history of composers and of Loja, from Renaissance to avant-garde. The collection spans almost 200 years of history, with more than 7,000 musical scores and 65 instruments on display.

Matilde Hidalgo de Procel Museum
The museum, on the main floor of the building of the Provincial Government of Loja, houses of artifacts of the life of Matilde Hidalgo, the first woman to become a medical doctor in Ecuador, and also the first woman to vote in Latin America.

City Entrance
City Entrance, model of Coat of Arms of the city, presented by King Philip II of Spain in 1571. The City Entrance is located at Av. Gran Colombia, it has a museum where exhibits galleries showing works of Lojan contemporary art, a cafe, gift shop. Views of the city center are possible from the clock tower.
Loja contains a number of historic churches, board of city of tourism has led to the search for a new way. Starting at the City Entrance, one of the first things a visitor will notice is a large orange stripe painted on the sidewalk. Following the band takes the person on a self-guided tour of the main churches, historical areas and of Loja.

Cathedral
The main cathedral, a masterpiece in the colonial style, is located in the central plaza. It is home to the Virgin of the Swan during his two-month stay in the city of Loja. Original of adobe its first building dates from the 1500s, the current building dates from 1838 (earlier buildings were lost due to earthquakes) The Cathedral is one of the largest churches in Ecuador. It is also the headquarters of the Diocese of Loja.

Church of San Francisco
The small church of San Francisco, a houses Franciscan convent of the city. The church was built in 1548 and rebuilt in 1851. The square, located in the historic center, has a monument to Alonso de Mercadillo, founder of the city.

Church of Santo Domingo
The Church of Santo Domingo was built in 1557, the entire building was once in the Gothic style, but after an earthquake in 1867, only the twin towers remained standing. The church was refinished in the colonial style, but the needles were left as a reminder of the old facade. The church was painted and decorated by Lojan Fray Enrique Mideros. In the church square there is a monument to Manuel Carrión Pinzano, founder in 1853 of the movement of federalism in Loja.

Church of San Sebastián
In 1660, the city of Loja, was devoted to Saint Sebastian in order to avoid destruction by earthquakes. The present church dates from 1900. Perhaps the most remarkable monument of Loja is located in the Plaza de San Sebastián (also called Independencia Square) - 32 meters clock tower commemorates the declaration of independence from the Spanish crown the November 18, 1820. The tower has four faces, with bronze reliefs depicting scenes from the history of the city.

The Valleys
Loja is an ideal city to get its surrounding places like the Valley of Malacatos and Vilcabamba and 30 km south of the city. The latter place is world-renowned for harboring people that exceed one hundred years easily. Catamayo Valley at a 20-minute drive west of the city is very busy as this place is the Camilo Ponce Enríquez Airport and also many watering places. A 60 km east of the lojan capital is Zamora, a paradise full of waterfalls, watering places, etc. Also within an hour's drive towards the north of Loja is Saraguro it is one of the few places in the world where its Inca customs remain intact.

Latacunga
Latacunga is the capital of the province of Cotopaxi and cantonal head of the homonymous canton. It is located in the central highlands of the country, in the foothills of the mountains of the Andes of Ecuador, near the Volcano Cotopaxi in the basin Patate. It is located at 2750 meters above sea level and has an average temperature of 12 degrees Celsius.
The city of Latacunga offers multiple destinations of various types (nature, culture, gastronomy, history, etc.), within the city and its surroundings.

Cathedral Construction began in the mid-17th century with a large ship and cruise with octagonal dome is of Romanesque style. In the late 19th century it built tower of Romanesque arches and Islamic shot. In its altar of pumice it appreciate pieces of colonial imagery. It is in the streets: Quito and General Maldonado.
Church of El Salto: Has a nave and twin towers, seated from north to south, it was made in the late 19th. It is located between the streets: Juan Abel Echeverría and Antonio Clavijo, next to the Plaza de El Salto.
Church of La Merced: It started as a chapel in 1640, it is built on a Latin cross plan, of a nave with two cruisers, highlights an artistic dome. In 1949, by the earthquake in Amabato, the tower fell on the front door, being rebuilt, but lost its original structure. It is located between the streets: Juan Abel Echeverría, and Quijano y Ordóñez.
Church of San Agustín: In neoclassical influence shows circular columns with Ionic capitals with its finished in cornice. Pumice is used to report quickly to the pillars that support the arches on both floors. In 1820, the monastery was occupied by Spanish military, serving as headquarters for a fraction of the Batallón "Los Andes". It is between the streets and Hermanas Páez and Quito.
Church of San Francisco: Its construction began in 1600 and ended in 1693, but in 1698 the church was left in ruins by the earthquake. It is located at street General Manuel Maldonado and Quijano y Ordóñez.
 'Church of San Sebastián:' is located at Josefa Calixto, between Juan Abel Echeverría and Isla San Bartolomé.
 'Church of San Felipe'
 'Church of Santo Domingo'
 'Mills of Monserrat' : built in 1756, as a colonial textile mill, now a multi-cultural center, in its facilities is the Archaeological Museum (with pre-Incan cultural relics), the Folk Museum (clothing, tools and sets referring to various manifestations of popular culture). And the installation of the gallery with works of Tabara, Guerrero, Guayasamín, Román
Municipal palace: official building, town hall, built between 1910 and 1936 in pumice with Doric and Corinthian influence elements with wall decorations that reflect patriotic events.
 'House of the Marquis of Miraflores' : built in the first half of the 18th century, among its several owners highlights the latacungan Ignacio Flores, Marquis of Miraflores and President of the Real Audiencia of Charcas (now Bolivia) in 1782. In its construction are appreciated stone carved in pumice with Mudéjar arches and arabesques. At present works the Department of Culture and Public Relations of the Cabildo, small folk, civic and historical museums and library "Simón Bolívar".
Ranch of Tilipulo: Originally built as a community operating worker in 1540. Today it is an architectural installation with religious influences that summarizing various aspects of local history.

Fiesta of la Mama Negra
This party has carried out in late September, the days 23 and 24, day of the autumn equinox, and that the Catholic Church commemorates the Virgin of Mercy; also it is celebrated by the festival of independence of the city, the November 11. It is a religious syncretism that has much color and joy as well as commotion, as thousands of domestic and foreign tourists attend this large festival not only to enjoy the music, costumes and dancing groups, but also the plentiful liquor. Despite this detail, the fiesta lives as pure representation of national folklore.
Latacunga, city embedded in the middle of the Ecuadorian Andes in South America, holds within it a unique socio-cultural and folk manifestation, the Comparsa de la Mama Negra, also called the Holy Tragedy or the Fiesta of the captaincy.
Its origin is lost in history, in a mixture of mestizo popular demonstrations: pagan and religious, Indigenous, African and Spanish; the same as its characters, rituals, costumes, music and dance bring life and endures over time such unique expression of the feelings of the people, retraced every year since the 17th century. In the 21st century it is a celebration in which homage to the Virgin of Mercy who granted according to tradition gratitude and recognition for protection in one of the eruptions of the world's highest active volcano, Cotopaxi.
On October 31, 2005, the National Institute of Cultural Heritage agreed to "declare as property belonging to the Intangible Cultural Heritage, the fiesta of la Mama Negra or fiesta of the Captaincy."

Beaches
Salinas
Salinas it is a city of Province of Santa Elena. It is the cantonal head of Salinas Canton. It has a population of 34 719 inhabitants and its urban area is divided in 4 parishes. It is located at the western end of the province and the mainland of the country; part of the urban area of sprig of Santa Elena, along with La Libertad, Santa Helena, José Luis Tamayo and Ballenita.
The city is considered the most important, popular and visited resort of Ecuador, for its beaches, upscale hotels, clubs, bars, discos and sports centers for the tourist. Among the tourist attractions in Salinas are:

Chipipe Beach: This is the widest, known and safe beach of the area, has few waves so it is recommended for children and inexperienced people. The calm blue waters, the birds, the beach and beside tall buildings make for a very attractive landscape. In the middle of the beach is the "Salinas Yacht Club".
San Lorenzo Beach: This beach offers big waves, making it ideal for the surf. Here are a variety of crafts and fishing. On this beach there are numerous crabs, when approaching a person, hiding in holes in the sand make by themselves.
Mar Bravo Beach: In this beach is forbidden to swim because the water is very dangerous. The sunsets are the main attraction of the place.
La Chocolatera: Located at the Naval Base of Salinas. It is the western end of the town, the cantón, the province and the mainland of the country; it is also the second most westerly point of South America. It is called Chocolatera by the ways that the waves crash in existing caves, forming foam and steam like a cup of chocolate. It has a colony of 20 sea lions and a lighthouse.
The Ecuasal Pools: It are salt wells that give the name to the city of Salinas. Here it can observe the process of extraction of salt and 116 species of native birds, some migratory.

Atacames
Atacames is the largest natural beach of Ecuador and the nearest of Quito; so most of the inhabitants of this city makes this resort one of the most visited and popular in the country.
Atacames and surroundings feature to tourist spacious strips of gray sand beach, several kilometers long at low tide, allowing a nice atmosphere for sand or water sports, especially the surf.
Excursions to nearby places are also very popular among tourists. It highlights the watching of humpback whales during the summer months, and visiting forests and mangroves. The Island of Los Pájaros is a paradise for bird lovers as these animals are found in the wild. Near Súa it can see a small zoo with local animal species, and the Atacama people themselves are a small museum and an aquarium. The marine aquarium La vida del mar, located on the boardwalk in the cantonal head, showing various own species of Ecuador's continental shelf.
Tonsupa, with its modern and elegant tourist residence towers, and several first-class hotels as Makana Resort, is a destination that has taken off in the last decade between the upper middle class and upper of north of the range, especially Quito. Similarly Same, where it is the exclusive Club CasaBlanca, which gives the beach landscape of the parish a picturesque Mediterranean style.
To get to Atacames can be accessed by modern highway Autopista del Sol, Esmeraldas stretch, which connects with the road to Quito.
An interesting feature for tourists is to use the motorcycle taxis as a means of transport to travel between regions.
In gastronomy include seafood and marine products in general. Very popular are the encocado de pescado, ceviche of shrimp, the traditional ceviche de concha and the corvina apanada, as well as innumerable buffet of dishes made with products of the sector.

Manta
Manta is visited annually by both foreign and domestic tourists. Its beaches include "Los Esteros", "Tarqui", "El Murciélago", "Barbasquillo", "San Lorenzo" y "Santa Marianita", "Liguiqui", "La Tiñosa" and "Piedra Larga".
Manta is known in Ecuador for the nightlife of the seawalls of El Murciélago and Tarqui and most of all the "pink zone" (zona rosa) as it is known on the street "Flavio Reyes" and also at the site of recent and growing movement " Plaza del Sol "; in all these places are many restaurants and various places of entertainment such as karaoke, discos and casinos.
It highlights the kindness and hospitality of its people, which makes this Cantón of the province of Manabí is preferred by both local and foreign. manta is known as one of the main ports of passing cruise in the South American coast.
The Eloy Alfaro International Airport joins Manta with Quito and Guayaquil.

Bahía de Caráquez
It is a city of coastal geographical region belonging to the canton Sucre, in the jurisdiction of the province of Manabí. It is located at the mouth of Chone River, and has considerable tourist infrastructure that places like cantonal head. The city is located about an hour north of the city of Manta and in the pre-Columbian era hosted the ancient Indian city Carán. Across the bay is the town of San Vicente. This trip is very picturesque and can be performed either in a canoe passenger, in a barge or in the bridge linking the two populations. Bahía is a tourist place, crime is minimal. Bahía is one of the most exclusive beaches of Ecuador. Many people, especially from the capital city, Quito, vacationing there.
Currently Bahía de Caráquez has become an anchorage of international sailing, that for safety, tranquility and tourist facilities found in this city an ideal spot for relaxation. The bay by have calm waters is used for water sports. It is also a city with nearby beaches as Canoa and La Bellaca, which are visited by surfers.
The climate of Bahía de Caráquez is spring all year, its temperature fluctuates between 24 and 30 °C.

Esmeraldas
Esmeraldas is a capital city of Province of Esmeraldas, in northwestern Ecuadorian territory to 318 km of Quito. The beach of the town of Esmeraldas has weekends with culinary attention, and nightlife.
Beaches, Virgin Forests, Indigenous Cayapas, Marimba and afro-Ecuadorian dance, archaeological site La Tolita, Islands, flora and fauna.
Near this small city bordered on the north by the Colombian border and west to the Pacific Ocean, there are beaches that no further than 30 km away and it have the hotel infrastructure meeting the demanding tastes of tourists. To the southwest, 11 km, Same rises amidst palm trees and clear waters.
To the palate it test the "encocado de pescado", prepared with coconut juice, popular with residents and travelers. Other typical dishes are the tapao, based on fish and plantains, patacones, empanadas, bolas and bolones de verde, also with plantains as base.

Playas
Playas, is a city of province of Guayas, located in the southwest of the country, along the Pacific Ocean, about 96 kilometers city of Guayaquil. Its population is 34.409 inhabitants until the year (2010), although this rises to winter by the presence of tourists, because of its condition of resort. It is the cantonal head of Canton Playas.
Since its founding, Playas was an important port for fishermen, condition that continues to this day. At the beginning of the 20th century, investing of people with some political power of Guayaquil, it launched the project of converting Playas in a resort. For 1910, Playas was incorporated as parish and finally in 1989 reached its separation of the canton Guayaquil and cantonization.
After the creation of the province of Santa Elena in 2007, the city of Playas was established as the only resort of the province of Guayas, which provided a better investment on this city as a tourist infrastructure.
Undoubtedly the best attractions are its long beaches, which have an excellent hotel infrastructure and services that make pleasant the visit and stay of thousands of Ecuadorian and foreign tourists, who every week visit this city.

Playa Rosada, located near the lighthouse, is a peaceful place for bathers and especially for excursions.
It can also go to visit the Shrine of Our Lady of the Rock (Santuario de la Virgen de la Roca).
Near Casa Blanca club, it can see pelicans and other birds in the sector.
Punta El Pelado, on the road to the site Engabao, is a pleasant and quiet ideal beach for hiking and camping with delicious local food.
The horse riding for its beaches is one of its main attractions.
The house of don Víctor Estrada is a true relic of the historical and cultural past.
In this county there are a lot of dishes that make the visit to Playas a true gastronomic delight. Among the most desired are a good range of ceviches of lobster, shrimp, shell, fish octopus or mixed, seafood rice, whole fish to coal, jugged albacore, roast oyster and ostrich burgers.

See also
Pueblos Mágicos (Ecuador)

References
External links
 Ecuador travel guide from Wikivoyage

## Culture of Ecuador
Ecuador is a multicultural and multiethnic nation, with the majority of its population is descended from a mixture of both European and Amerindian ancestry. The other 10% of Ecuador's population originate east of the Atlantic Ocean, predominantly from Spain, Italy, Lebanon, France and Germany. Around the Esmeraldas and Chota regions, the African influence would be strong among the small population of Afro-Ecuadorians that account for no more than 10%. Close to 80% of Ecuadorians are Roman Catholic, although the indigenous population blend Christian beliefs with ancient indigenous customs. The racial makeup of Ecuador is 70% mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white), 7% Amerindian, 12% White, and 11% Black.
Ecuador can be split up into four geographically distinct areas; the Costa (coast), the Sierra (highlands), El Oriente (the east; which includes the Amazonic region) and the Galápagos Islands.
There is tension and general dislike between the residents of the highlands Quito and the coast Guayaquil the two largest cities of the country. Centralism in these two cities, also creates animus from neighboring provinces. The at times extreme cultural differences between the Coast and the Mountainous Regions can be traced back to pre-hispanic times as the Sierra had a strong Incan presence whereas the Coast was sparsely populated by non-Incan populations such as the Valdivia, Moche, etc. Post colonization the regionalism was accentuated and perpetuated, with the Coast having more Pan-European and African influences and the Sierra having strictly Indigenous influences. The animosity between the two regions has effectively bifurcated the country into two distinct ethnic consciousness and national identities. The enmity between the regions has often detained national economic progress as development in one region or the other is viewed with chagrin.

History
Ecuador was inhabited with numerous civilizations which constructed the ethnic cultural background of Ecuador years before the Inca Empire. Many civilizations rose throughout Ecuador, such as the Chorre and the Valdivia, the latter of which spans its existence before any civilization in the Americas. The most notable groups that existed in Ecuador before, and during the Inca conquest were the Quitus (near present-day Quito), the Cañari (in present-day Cuenca), and the Las Vegas Culture (near Guayaquil). Each civilization developed its own distinguished architecture, pottery, and religious beliefs, while others developed archaeologically disputed systems of writing (an achievement the Incas did not achieve). After years of fierce resistance, the Cañari succumbed to the Inca expansion, and were assimilated loosely under the Inca Empire. To communicate with each other the Inca developed stone-paved highways spanning thousands of miles used by messengers. These messengers passed each other records of the empire's status, which are sometimes thought to have been encoded in a system of knots called quipu. After conquering Ecuador, Huayna Capac imposed upon the tribes the use of the Quechua (or Kichwa) language, lingua franca of the Inca and still widely spoken in Ecuador.
Beginning in the 16th century, Spanish governors ruled Ecuador for nearly 300 years, first from the viceroyalty of Lima, then later from the viceroyalty of Gran Colombia. The Spanish introduced Roman Catholicism, colonial architecture, and the Spanish language.

Regionalism
Each region is divided according to its own unique geography, creating a sense of individual regional pride. The most notable regional competition or fierce enmity is between Guayaquileños, Coastal Ecuadorians  and Quiteños, Highland Ecuadorians. This sense of regionalism has created incredibly barriers between countrymen. Due to strong regionalism, the national economy has suffered, as either region and its peoples hesitate to do anything that might result in the expansion of the other's economy, even if it would mean slowing the national economy. During wartime, regionalism was considerably abated, but there are reports of individuals betraying their country, due to their desire to see the other region lose; for example, allegations that someone had given information to enemy troops during Tawantinzuma.

Family
Ecuadorians place great importance on family, both nuclear and extended. Unlike in much of the modern west, Ecuadorians live in multi-generational homes with the elderly and young children living under the same household. Godparents or "padrinos"  have an important role in Ecuador, where they are often expected to provide both financial and psychological support to their godchildren.
Families are formed in at least one of the following two ways: Civil Marriage (which is the legal form of formalizing a bond between a man and woman, which all married couples are required to undergo) and the Free Union (where a man and woman decide to form a family, without undergoing any official ceremony). The Ecuadorian Constitution accords the members of a Free Union family, the same rights and duties as any other legally constituted family.
There are many variations in family structure, as well as in the social and cultural structure in Ecuador, depending on the socioeconomic position in which people live. Generally, the upper classes adopt more white American or white European ways of life, customs, and culture. Whereas, lower classes more widely adopt the customs, lifestyles, and culture of native peoples. This leads to great contrasts within Ecuadorian people, effectively creating parallel societies.

Marital roles
Women are generally responsible for the upbringing and care of children, and of husbands in Ecuador, and traditionally, men have taken a completely inactive role in this area. This has begun to change, due to the fact that more and more women are joining the workforce, which has resulted in men doing housework and becoming involved in the care of their children. This change was greatly influenced by Eloy Alfaro's liberal revolution in 1906, in which Ecuadorian women were granted the right to work. Women's suffrage was granted in 1929.
Girls tend to be more protected by their parents than boys, due to traditional social structures. At age 15, girls often have traditional parties called fiesta de quince años. Quinceañera is the term used for the girl, not the party. The party involves festive food and dance. This coming of age or debutante party is a tradition found in most Latin American countries, comparable to the American tradition of sweet sixteen parties.
This special event sometimes involves a doll being given away to show adulthood.

Television and cinema
The majority of the movies shown in movie theatres in Ecuador come from the United States and Spain. The movies are often in English, and have Spanish subtitles, but are sometimes translated for family movies.
The Ecuador Film Company was founded in Guayaquil in 1924. During the early 1920s to early 1930s, Ecuador enjoyed its Cinema Golden Age era. However, the production of motion pictures declined with the coming of sound.
Beyond the Gates of Splendor (2002), directed by Jim Hanon, is a documentary about five missionaries killed by the Huaorani Indians in the 1950s. He recycles the story in the 2006 Hollywood production End of the Spear. Most of this film was shot in Panama.
Entre Marx y una Mujer Desnuda (Between Marx and a Nude Woman, 1995), by Ecuadorian Camilo Luzuriaga, provides a window into the life of young Ecuadorian leftists living in a country, plagued by the remnants of feudal systems and coups d'état. It is based on a novel by Jorge Enrique Adoum.

Cuisine
An Ecuadorian's day, at least as far as their diet is concerned, is centered around lunch, rather than dinner.
There is no one food that is especially Ecuadorian, as cuisine varies from region, people, and cultures. For example, Costeños (people from the coast) prefer fish, beef, beans, rice, and plantains (unripened banana like fruits), while Serranos from the mountainous regions prefer pork, chicken, corn, potatoes, and white hominy mote.
Some general examples of Ecuadorian cuisine include patacones (unripe plantains fried in oil, mashed up, then refried), llapingachos (a pan seared potato ball), seco de chivo (a type of stew made from goat), and fanesca (a type of soup made from beans, lentils, and corn), traditionally served on Easter. More regionalized examples include ceviche from the coast, churrasco, and encebollado, the most popular dish on the coast.

Language
Most Ecuadorians speak Spanish, though many speak Amerindian languages such as Kichwa, the Ecuadorian variety of Quechua. Other Amerindian languages spoken in Ecuador include Awapit (spoken by the Awá), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Shuar (spoken by the Shuar), Achuar-Shiwiar (spoken by the Achuar and the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsafiki (spoken by the Tsáchila), Siona (spoken by the Siona), Secoya (spoken by the Secoya), and Waorani language (spoken by the Waorani).
Though most features of Ecuadorian Spanish are those universal to the Spanish-speaking world, there are several idiosyncrasies.
Costeños tend to speak more quickly and louder than serranos, with strong linguistic similarities to Canarian Spanish. A common term costeños call one another is mijo, a contraction of the phrase mi hijo ("my son"). Several such terms are derived in consequence of their rapid speech, and they also employ intricate linguistic humor and jokes that are difficult to translate or even understand in the other regions. Furthermore, each province has a different variety of accent, with different specific terms influenced by the different racial and ethnic groups that immigrated and settled the areas.
Serranos usually speak softly and with less speed. They are traditionally seen as more conservative, and use a number of Kichwa-derived terms in their everyday speech which is often puzzling to other regions. A widely known example is the word wawa which means "child" in Kichwa. Their speech is influenced by their Incan Amerindian roots, and can be seen as a variant of other Andean accents. However two main accents are noticed in the Andean region, the north and the austral accent. More variations of the austral accent are found in southern regions.
Whistling, yelling, or yawning to get someone's attention is considered rude, yet is practiced informally and mostly by lower classes.

Art
Indigenous art of Tigua
The Kichwa people of Tigua, located in the central Sierra region, are world-renowned for their traditional paintings on sheepskin canvases. Historically, the Tigua people have been known for painting highly decorative masks and drums; painting on flat surfaces is somewhat of a modern occurrence. Today, Tigua paintings can be found for sale all over Ecuador, particularly in touristic areas.
Tigua artists are celebrated for their use of vibrant colors and simplistic themes. Most paintings depict scenes of pastoral life, religious ceremonies, and festivals. The volcano Cotopaxi is commonly depicted in the landscape of many paintings, as it holds particular cultural significance in the region.

Literature
San Juan de Ambato, a city in central Ecuador, is known as the "City of the three Juanes", with Juan Montalvo (a novelist and essayist), Juan León Mera (author of the words to Ecuador's national anthem, and "Salve, Oh Patria"), and Juan Benigno Vela (another novelist and essayist) all sharing it as a place of birth. Other important writers include Eugenio Espejo, from colonial Quito, whose works inspired the fight for freedom from Spain in Ecuador and touched a number of topics, novelist and poet Horacio Hidrovo Velásquez, from early century's Manabí, whose works have inspired films.

Music
The music of Ecuador has a long history. Pasillo is a genre domestic to Ecuador and is regarded as the "national genre." Through the years, many cultures have brought their influences together to create new types of music. There are also different kinds of traditional music like albazo, pasacalle, fox incaico, tonada, diablada pillareña, capishca, Bomba (highly established in afro-Ecuadorian society in cities such as Esmeraldas), and so on.

Tecnocumbia and Rockola are clear examples of the influence of foreign cultures. One of the most indigenous and traditional forms of dancing in Ecuador is Sanjuanito. It's originally from northern Ecuador (Otavalo-Imbabura). Sanjuanito is a danceable music used in the festivities of the mestizo and indigenous cultures. According to the Ecuadorian musicologist Segundo Luis Moreno, Sanjuanito was danced by indigenous people during San Juan Bautista's birthday. This important date was established by the Spaniards on June 24, coincidentally the same date when indigenous people celebrated their rituals of Inti Raymi.
The Panama hat is of Ecuadorian origin, and is known there as "Sombrero de paja toquilla", or a Jipijapa. It is made principally in Montecristi, in the province of Manabí and in the province of Azuay. Its manufacture (particularly that of the Montecristi superfino) is considered a great craft. In Cuenca an important Panama hat industry exists.

Sports
Football is the most popular sport in Ecuador. Some of the most noteworthy accomplishments of Ecuadorian football teams are those of Barcelona SC, having accumulated a total of 16 domestic titles, and of LDU Quito having both won the Copa Libertadores and placed second in the FIFA Club World Cup in 2008; all are feats that are currently unmatched by other teams in Ecuador.
Information on all other Ecuadorian sports related articles are below:

Football in Ecuador
Ecuador national football team
Ecuador women's national football team
Ecuador national under-20 football team
Ecuador national baseball team
Ecuadorian volleyball (Ecua-volley)

See also
Latin American culture
Hispanic culture
Music of Ecuador
Religion in Ecuador

References
Further reading
Ubidia, Abdón. CUENTOS, LEYENDAS, MITOS Y CASOS DEL ECUADOR. 2da. Edición. Libresa, 1993. pp. 129–131. ISBN 9789978492239.
Abdón Ubidia, ed. (1999). La dama tapada: antología del cuento popular ecuatoriano (in Spanish). Barcelona: Azul.

External links
Ecuador people and culture
Hip ECUADOR
Ecuador
Archaeology of Ecuador
Museum and Virtual Library (Museums of Central Bank of Ecuador) English
Ecuadorian Literature.com
"Category: Quechua Language Writers". Ecuadorian Literature.com. 4 October 2022.

## Cuisine of Ecuador
Ecuadorian cuisine is diverse, varying with altitude and associated agricultural conditions. Ecuadorian cuisine is an amalgamation of Spanish, Inca, and Amazonian cuisines and to a lesser degree Italian, Lebanese, African, Scandinavian, German, English, and Chinese. Beef, chicken, and seafood are popular in the coastal regions, especially ceviche, and are typically served with carbohydrate-rich foods, such as rice accompanied with lentils, pasta, or plantain. In the mountainous regions pork, chicken, beef and cuy (guinea pig) are popular and are often served with rice, maize, or potatoes. A popular street food in mountainous regions is Hornado (roasted pig). Some examples of Ecuadorian cuisine in general include patacones (green plantain slices fried in oil, mashed up, and then refried), llapingachos (a pan-seared potato ball), and seco de chivo (a type of stew made from goat). A wide variety of fresh fruit is available, particularly at lower altitudes, including granadilla, passion fruit, naranjilla, several types of banana, uvilla, taxo, and tree tomato.
The food is somewhat different in the southern mountainous areas, featuring typical Loja Province food such as repe, a soup prepared with green bananas; cecina, roasted pork; and miel con quesillo, or "cuajada", as dessert. In the rainforest, a dietary staple is the yuca, elsewhere called cassava. The starchy root is peeled and boiled, fried, or used in a variety of other dishes. Across the nation it is also used as a bread, pan de yuca, which is analogous to the Brazilian pão de queijo and often consumed alongside different types of drinkable yogurt. Many fruits are available in this region, including bananas, tree-grapes, and peach palms.

Typical meal
Most regions in Ecuador follow the traditional three-course meal of sopa/soup and segundo/second dish which includes rice or pasta and a protein such as beef, poultry, pig or fish. Then dessert and a coffee are customary. Dinner is usually lighter and sometimes just coffee or agua de remedio/herbal tea with bread.
For the most part, Ecuador is known not only for its bananas, and all the dishes made from them, but for its starch consumption of products like potato, bread, pasta, rice, and yuca. Traditionally any of these ingredients can be found in either the soup or the rice platter that may be served.

In a 2023 study, the most consumed Ecuadorian dishes were found to be encebollado, ceviche and hornado. Also, small variations were found among demographics, except for the representations between the Coast and Highland regions which had low correlation.

Desserts
Arroz con leche (rice pudding): Another dessert originally from Spain that can be found in various varieties throughout Latin America. Arroz con leche is one of the more common desserts found in homes and restaurants of modern-day Ecuador. It consists primarily of cooked rice, cinnamon/nutmeg, raisins, and milk.
Helados de Paila (ice cream): Helado de paila is a sorbet-like specialty that hails from Ibarra. It comes in an array of flavors, and it is made with fruit juice, ice, sugar, and sometimes fruits. All the ingredients are traditionally churned by hand inside a large bronze or copper pot (paila) that is placed on ice. It is said that this frozen treat was initially made with the snow from the glacier on top of the Imbabura volcano. Allegedly, Rosalía Suárez first collected the ice, and her descendants still keep the tradition alive and run an ice cream shop in Ibarra.
Pristiños and buñuelos are two distinct, yet related, fried dough desserts popular in Ecuador. Both are typically served warm, often drizzled with a sweet panela (unrefined whole cane sugar) syrup known as miel de panela. Pristiños are characterized by their delicate, crispy, ribbon-like or spiral shape, often dusted with sugar and cinnamon. Buñuelos, on the other hand, are soft, often irregularly shaped fritters, sometimes incorporating cheese or other ingredients into the dough, giving them a more substantial and sometimes savory-sweet profile. While both are especially eaten during festive seasons like Christmas and Holy Week, they are available year-round in bakeries and traditional food stalls across the country.

Panetón or Panettone: is a type of sweet bread with dried fruit. It was popularized by Italian immigrants that arrived in the country in the late 1800s. It is usually served for breakfast around Christmas with a cup of hot chocolate. They used to come in big boxes only with huge panetóns inside but now they also sell personal portions. Because Christmas is the hottest time of year, people often replace the hot chocolate with coffee or a drink that's served cold. 
Flan: Is a popular custard dessert with a layer of clear caramel sauce.
Alfajores is a dessert found in virtually all of Spain's former colonies. It is derived from the versions popular in Spain during the colonial period. The original Spanish recipes, however, have been modified. The basic recipe uses a base mix of flour, margarine, and powdered sugar, which is oven baked. Alfajores consist of two or more layers of this baked pastry, and is usually filled with dulce de leche (a caramel-colored, sweet, creamy filling made with milk and sugar)
Turrones (or nougat) is another originally Spanish dessert.

Beverages and Drinks
Aguardiente, a sugarcane-based spirit, is probably the most popular national alcohol. Important brands of aguardiente are Caña Manaba, Zhumir, Cantaclaro, Pájaro Azul, Norteño, and Trópico Seco. Since sugar cane is the base of the alcoholic drinks, rum is also highly popular with local brands like Rum San Miguel or Ron pon pon. During the holidays of Quito, canelazo is a popular drink made from aguardiente.
Drinkable yogurt, available in many fruit flavors, is popular and is often consumed with pan de yuca (a puffy yet gooey bread roll made from cassava flour eaten hot). One traditional non-alcoholic beverage is pinol, made using máchica (toasted barley flour), panela (unrefined sugar), and spices. Another traditional non-alcoholic beverage is colada morada, which is made with black corn flour, sweetened with panela, and flavored with fresh fruit, herbs and spices. 
Fioravanti is a fruit-flavored, carbonated soft drink first sold in 1878 in Ecuador. It is notable for being one of the first soft drinks commercially sold. In 1991, it was acquired by The Coca-Cola Company.

Güitig is a mineral water widely consumed around the country at times supplanting tap water as the drink of choice.

Influences
Catholic church
Besides the regions, there are several typical Ecuadorian dishes consumed on special occasions. Fanesca, a fish soup including several types of beans, lentils, and corn, is often eaten during Lent and Easter and is traditionally served all over Ecuador. During the week before the commemoration of the deceased or All Souls' Day, the fruit beverage colada morada is typical, accompanied by a "guagua de pan" which is stuffed bread shaped like children.

Chinese influence
Chifa, from the Mandarin words 吃饭 (chī fàn, lit. 'to eat rice'), is the Ecuadorian term for Ecuadorian-Chinese food (or for an Ecuadorian-Chinese fusion restaurant). Because many Chinese ingredients are hard to find in Ecuador, the Chinese modified their cuisine and incorporated many Ecuadorian elements (mainly Spanish, Indigenous, and African) into their cuisine.

Middle Eastern influence
Since 1875, there has been a constant flow of Lebanese immigrants to Ecuador, first fleeing the Ottoman Empire, and then the aftermath of World War I and II. By 1986, there were 97,500 Lebanese immigrants in Ecuador. Shawarma restaurants have become increasingly popular, presenting another instance of fusion cuisine. Since many of the ingredients in Middle Eastern cuisine cannot be found in the country, Lebanese immigrants have made replacements with native ingredients.

See also

List of Ecuadorian dishes and foods


== References ==

## List of museums in Ecuador
As of the last comprehensive survey published in 2018, there were 175 museums in Ecuador.

National museum network
As of 2020, Ecuador's Ministry of Culture and Heritage administers a national network of seventeen museums through four institutions designated as core museums. The core museums are listed below in bold, before their respective subordinate museums:

National Museum of Ecuador, Quito
Imbabura Factory Cultural Complex, Atuntaqui
Esmeraldas Museum and Cultural Centre, Esmeraldas
Ibarra Museum and Cultural Centre, Ibarra
Camilo Egas Museum, Quito
Mariscal Sucre Cultural Civic Centre, Museum and Library, Chillogallo, Quito
Museum of Anthropology and Contemporary Art, Guayaquil
Lovers of Sumpa Museum, Santa Elena
Nahim Isaías Museum, Guayaquil
Presley Norton Museum, Guayaquil
Pumapungo Museum, Cuenca
Loja Museum and Cultural Centre, Loja
Riobamba Museum and Cultural Centre, Riobamba
Alfaro City Civic Centre, Montecristi
Manta Museum and Cultural Centre, Manta
Portoviejo Museum and Archives, Portoviejo
Bahía de Caráquez Museum and Cultural Centre, Bahía de Caráquez
The Ministry also administers the archaeological sites of Ingapirca and Hojas–Jaboncillo, both of which have site museums, through the National Institute of Cultural Heritage.

Other museums in Ecuador by location
The Ministry of Culture and Heritage published a directory of 175 Ecuadorian museums in 2018. Besides those administered by the Ministry of Culture and Heritage, other museums in Ecuador include those in the following list, sorted by location:

Ambato
Martínez-Holguín House Museum

Cuenca
Museum of Aboriginal Cultures
Museum of Las Conceptas Monastery
Museum of the Old Cathedral of Cuenca

Guayaquil
Guayaquil Municipal Museum
Luis Adolfo Noboa Naranjo Museum
Museum of the Ecuadorian Firefighter

Quito and Pichincha Province
Abya Yala Museum
Alberto Mena Caamaño Museum
Benjamín Carrión Palace
Carondelet Palace
La Capilla del Hombre
Casa de la Cultura Ecuatoriana
Casa del Alabado Museum of Pre-Columbian Art
City Museum (Quito)
Ciudad Mitad del Mundo
Cochasquí
Ecuador National Museum of Medicine
Friar Pedro Gocial Museum in the Convent of San Francisco
Gustavo Orcés V. Natural History Museum
Inti Ñan Museum
Metropolitan Cultural Center
Museum House of Sucre
Numismatic Museum of Ecuador
Quito Astronomical Observatory

See also
List of museums by country


== References ==

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- Galápagos Islands
- Manta Beach, Ecuador
- Santa Elena Beach, Ecuador
- Manabi Province, Ecuador
- Esmeraldas Province, Ecuador

## Famous Museums
- Museo de la Amazonia de Quito
- Museo Nacional de Arte Contemporáneo (MANA)
- Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Guayaquil (MAC)
- Museo de Arte de la Universidad Central del Ecuador (MAUCE)
- Museo de Arte Colonial de Guayaquil (MAC)

## Local Desserts
- Chicha de Muka
- Capirotada
- Pastilla de Piña
- Pastilla de Coco
- Flan de Coco
