--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Indonesia
FILE_NAME: country_indonesia.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:46:22
----------------

# Indonesia

## General Overview
Indonesia, officially the Republic of Indonesia, is a country in Southeast Asia and Oceania, between the Indian and Pacific oceans. Comprising about 17,000 islands, including Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, and parts of Borneo and New Guinea, Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic state and the 14th-largest country by area, at 1,904,569 square kilometres (735,358 square miles). Indonesia has significant areas of wilderness that support one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity. It shares land borders with Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, and Malaysia, as well as maritime borders with seven other countries, including Australia, Singapore, and the Philippines.
The Indonesian archipelago has been inhabited since prehistoric times, with early human presence evidenced by fossils of Homo erectus and Homo sapiens, and megalithic sites. By the early second millennium, it had become a crossroads for international trade linking East and South Asia. Over the centuries, external influences—including Hinduism, Buddhism and later Islam—were absorbed into local societies, which introduced lasting cultural and religious influences. European powers later competed to monopolise trade in the Spice Islands of Maluku during the Age of Discovery, followed by three and a half centuries of Dutch colonial rule, before Indonesia proclaimed its independence in the aftermath of World War II. 
Since independence, Indonesia has experienced separatist conflicts, corruption, political upheaval and natural disasters, alongside democratisation and rapid economic growth. The country today is a presidential republic with an elected legislature and consists of 38 provinces, some of which enjoy greater autonomy than others. Home to over 280 million people, Indonesia ranks fourth in the world by population and has the largest Muslim population of any country. More than half of Indonesians live on Java, the most heavily populated island in the world, while the capital Jakarta is the world's most populous city.
Indonesian society comprises hundreds of ethnic and linguistic groups, with Javanese forming the largest. National identity is unified under the motto Bhinneka Tunggal Ika, reflected by a national language alongside cultural and religious pluralism. A newly industrialised country, Indonesia has the largest national economy in Southeast Asia by GDP. The country is active in regional and global affairs as a middle power and is a member of major multilateral organisations, including the United Nations, G20, the Non-Aligned Movement, ASEAN, and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.

Etymology
The name Indonesia is usually explained as a compound of the Greek words Indos (Ἰνδός) and nesos (νῆσος), together meaning 'Indian islands'. The term dates to the 19th century, well before the formation of independent Indonesia. In 1850, George Windsor Earl, an English ethnologist, proposed the terms Indunesians—and his preferred term, Malayunesians—for the inhabitants of the "Indian Archipelago or Malay Archipelago". In the same publication, James Richardson Logan used Indonesia as a geographical term for the Indian Archipelago. Dutch academics writing in East Indies publications were reluctant to adopt Indonesia. They preferred Malay Archipelago (Dutch: Maleische Archipel); the Netherlands East Indies (Nederlandsch Oost Indië), popularly Indië; the East (de Oost); and Insulinde.
After 1900, Indonesia became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and native nationalist groups adopted it for political expression. Adolf Bastian of the University of Berlin popularised the name through his book Indonesien oder die Inseln des Malayischen Archipels, 1884–1894. Among indigenous figures, Soewardi Soerjaningrat was an early promoter of the name; in November 1918, he established the Indonesisch Persbureau in The Hague, a press bureau that used Indonesia in its name.

History
Prehistory, early states, and Islamisation
The Indonesian archipelago has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Fossils of Homo erectus ("Java Man") date back between 2 million and 500,000 BCE, while Homo sapiens arrived around 50,000 BCE. Archaeological discoveries include cave paintings in Sulawesi, where narrative rock art has been dated to at least 51,200 years ago. Later megalithic traditions appeared in several regions, including Java, Sumatra, Sulawesi, Sumba, Flores, and Nias, where stone monuments were used for burial, ancestor veneration, commemoration, and ritual life.
Beginning several millennia BCE, peoples of the Austronesian language group migrated from Taiwan into island Southeast Asia, and related languages spread across much of the archipelago. Rice cultivation and village life developed unevenly across the islands, while early trade in the last centuries BCE and the early centuries CE connected parts of the archipelago with South and East Asia. Foreign merchants, goods, technologies, writing systems, and religious ideas entered local societies through these routes, helping some coastal settlements grow into ports and centres of local rule.
From the 7th century, maritime kingdoms such as the Sumatra-based Srivijaya grew through trade and Buddhist religious networks. Hindu and Buddhist influences also appeared in Javanese court culture, religious life, and temple architecture. Between the 8th and 10th centuries, the Sailendra and Mataram dynasties built major architectural works, including Borobudur and Prambanan. Following a failed Mongol invasion of Java, the Majapahit empire emerged in the late 13th century and came to dominate much of the archipelago's maritime commerce. These kingdoms and empires linked courts, ports, and religious communities across parts of the archipelago, although their authority varied by region and period.
Along the trade routes of the Indian Ocean and the Strait of Malacca, Islam was established in northern Sumatra by the late 13th century, and spread further through Java and Sumatra over the following centuries. Historians have linked its expansion to maritime trade, the rise of coastal sultanates, and the work of Islamic teachers and missionaries, including the Wali Sanga. In Java, older Javanese cultural forms entered Islamic practice, giving Javanese Islam a style unlike those found in Malaya and Sumatra.

European contact, colonial rule, and independence
European entry into the archipelago began in the early 16th century, when Portuguese expeditions sought the eastern sources of the Asian spice trade. Dutch voyages followed later in the century, and in 1602 competing Dutch trading companies were merged into the Dutch East India Company (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, VOC). The VOC began as a commercial company but acquired military, diplomatic, and territorial functions before it was dissolved in 1800, after which its possessions passed to the Dutch state as the Dutch East Indies.
Dutch rule expanded in stages and met repeated resistance, including in Java, Sumatra, Bali, and Aceh. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Dutch authority spread across several outer-island regions, bringing most of present-day Indonesia under colonial rule. In western New Guinea, an early Dutch outpost was abandoned in the 1830s, and permanent occupation came only after 1898. The resulting colony was governed from Batavia through centralised authority, with both direct rule and indirect arrangements across many local societies.
The Japanese invasion and occupation during World War II ended Dutch colonial rule; by 1945, Japan's impending defeat and surrender left nationalist leaders room to act. On 17 August 1945, shortly after Japan's surrender, Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta issued the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence; Sukarno later became the country's first president and Hatta its first vice-president. The Netherlands then attempted to restore colonial rule, prompting the Indonesian National Revolution. The conflict ended in 1949, when Indonesian resistance and pressure from the United Nations and the United States led the Netherlands to agree to a transfer of sovereignty.

Independent Indonesia
Sukarno replaced parliamentary democracy with "Guided Democracy", concentrating authority around the presidency while balancing political Islam, the military, and the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI). After the attempted coup in 1965, the military blamed the PKI and, with allied civilian groups, carried out a widespread and violent anti-communist campaign. The PKI was destroyed, Sukarno lost effective power, and Major General Suharto assumed the presidency in 1968, establishing the authoritarian New Order regime. The new administration was supported by Western governments during the Cold War, reopened Indonesia to foreign investment, and governed during three decades of rapid economic growth and industrialisation.
Indonesia's invasion of East Timor in 1975 and the occupation that followed prompted international criticism, and the Santa Cruz massacre in 1991 put Indonesia's human-rights record under greater international scrutiny. The Asian financial crisis in 1997–98 turned into a political crisis, causing unrest and Suharto's resignation in May 1998. In 1999, East Timor voted to secede after nearly a quarter-century under Indonesian rule, a period discussed in scholarship in relation to genocide and occupation.
In the post-Suharto era, Indonesia introduced democratic reforms, including regional autonomy and the first direct presidential election. The early years of reform also saw political instability, terrorism, and ethnic and religious conflict in several regions. A 2005 peace agreement ended large-scale fighting in Aceh after the previous year's Indian Ocean tsunami brought more international attention to the province. Since the mid-2000s, Indonesia's economy has generally grown steadily, while its electoral democracy has endured, although corruption and criticism of authoritarian practices have persisted.

Geography
Indonesia is an equatorial archipelago of coastal plains, mountains, and volcanic islands. It lies between latitudes 11°S and 6°N and longitudes 95°E and 141°E, and is the world's largest archipelagic state, extending 5,120 kilometres (3,181 mi) from east to west and 1,760 kilometres (1,094 mi) from north to south. Several straits, including Malacca, Sunda, and Lombok, carry international traffic between the Indian and Pacific Oceans, including ships transporting oil, gas, and industrial goods.
The number of Indonesian islands varies by counting method, with published figures ranging from 13,466 named islands to more than 17,500; about 922 are permanently inhabited. Its five main islands are Sumatra, Java, Borneo (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), Sulawesi, and New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea). Java accounts for less than 7% of Indonesia's land area but is its most densely settled island, with intensive farming and extensive urban growth. Forest cover also differs widely, with larger forested areas in Papua and Maluku than in Java and Bali.
Indonesia's terrain includes high peaks, volcanic lakes, major rivers, and coastal plains. At 4,884 metres (16,024 ft), Puncak Jaya in New Guinea is Indonesia's highest peak, while Lake Toba in Sumatra is its largest lake. In Kalimantan, the Kapuas, Barito, and Mahakam form river networks that have long linked coastal and inland settlements. Oceans, islands, monsoons, and topography affect rainfall; plate boundaries make earthquakes and volcanic eruptions frequent; and past changes in island connections have affected species distributions.

Climate
Indonesia's equatorial position and monsoon winds give it a tropical climate. Most lowland areas are warm and humid throughout the year, while higher terrain is cooler; seasonal temperature differences are small. Much of the country has a tropical rainforest climate, with tropical monsoon and savanna climates across parts of the islands. The wet season usually runs from November to April and the dry season from May to October, although the timing differs by region. Seasonal rainfall helps set rice-planting calendars and influences droughts, floods, and fires.
Rainfall varies across the archipelago. Western Sumatra, Java, and the interiors of Kalimantan and Papua are among the wetter areas, while regions nearer Australia, including Nusa Tenggara, are generally drier. The surrounding oceans, island geography, monsoon winds, and topography all affect where and when rain falls. In drier parts of the country, El Niño events can reduce rainfall and lengthen dry periods, causing water shortages and crop losses.
Indonesia is expected to face rising temperatures, changes in rainfall, higher sea levels, and greater exposure to heat and flooding. These changes affect agriculture, water supply, public health, coastal settlements, and wildfire management. Sea-level rise is especially relevant to coastal areas, where much of Indonesia's population and infrastructure is located. Poorer households and communities with weaker infrastructure are likely to have less capacity to adapt.

Geology
Indonesia lies on the Pacific Ring of Fire, where several major tectonic plates meet along subduction zones and active faults. It is one of the world's most active tectonic regions, with frequent earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Nearby communities face hazards from eruptions, lahars, ash fall, earthquakes, tsunamis, and other geological events.
About 130 volcanoes are classified as active, with volcanism concentrated along the Sunda, Banda, and Halmahera arcs. Fresh volcanic ash can damage crops, settlements, transport, and health, while weathered ash helps form fertile soils in volcanic regions, including parts of Java and Bali. Large eruptions can also produce pyroclastic flows, lahars, volcanic tsunamis, and, in rare cases, affect climate and air travel beyond Indonesia.
Several eruptions in the archipelago have had effects far from their source. A super-eruption at present-day Lake Toba occurred around 74,000 years ago and has been examined for possible effects on climate and ancient human populations. The eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815 had global climatic effects and contributed to the Year Without a Summer in 1816 across parts of the Northern Hemisphere. The eruption of Krakatoa in 1883 caused severe regional destruction and drew worldwide scientific attention.
Earthquakes are frequent, especially along offshore subduction zones and active faults that cross the archipelago. Offshore earthquakes can generate destructive tsunamis, while shallow inland and near-coastal earthquakes can heavily damage populated areas. Major recent events include the 2004 earthquake and tsunami near northern Sumatra, the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake, and the 2018 Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami.

Biodiversity
Indonesia is one of 17 megadiverse countries recognised by Conservation International. Its many islands, habitats, and geological history have produced a large number of plant and animal species, many found nowhere else. Deep-water channels between islands have limited the movement of many species, leaving separate island lineages and high levels of endemism.
Indonesia's flora and fauna include Asian and Australasian species. The Sunda Shelf islands have closer links to Asian fauna because lower sea levels once connected parts of western Indonesia with mainland Southeast Asia. Farther east, Wallacea—including Sulawesi, Maluku, and the Lesser Sunda Islands—lies between the Sunda and Sahul shelves and has high endemism. In western New Guinea, plate movement, changing island distances, and former land connections helped isolate microhylid frog lineages and diversify them.
Indonesia has 54,716 kilometres (33,999 miles) of coastline, with coastal and marine ecosystems that include coral reefs, mangroves, and seagrass beds. Its reefs form part of the Coral Triangle and contain many coral and reef fish species. Indonesia also contains most of Southeast Asia's old-growth forest. Forest clearing and fragmentation continue to affect terrestrial habitats, while land-based pollution and destructive fishing have reduced coral diversity on some reefs.

Environment and conservation
Indonesia's major environmental pressures include peatland degradation, deforestation, logging, plantation expansion, and mining. Peat swamp forests store large amounts of carbon and support distinct plant communities and threatened fauna, but logging, fire, drainage, and land conversion have reduced them.
For many threatened species, including the critically endangered Bali myna, Sumatran orangutan, and Javan rhinoceros, the main pressures include habitat loss, habitat degradation, and illegal exploitation. Forest fragmentation and land-use change break habitats into smaller blocks, isolate wildlife populations, and reduce biodiversity. Conservation work includes protected areas, species and genetic conservation, forest and land rehabilitation, and community-based biodiversity management.
As of 2024, Indonesia has designated 554 protected areas covering 27 million hectares, or 14% of its land area, along with marine reserves and 54 national parks. Poaching, illegal logging, settlement expansion, tourism pressure, and non-timber cultivation still affect protected areas; implementation is also limited by weak local capacity, coordination, monitoring, and stakeholder participation. Conservation measures can affect local rights and livelihoods, especially where stricter rules limit access to natural resources used for income.

Government and politics
Indonesia is a unitary republic with a presidential system under the 1945 Constitution. The five principles of Pancasila appear in the preamble and are taught in civic education as the basis of Indonesian citizenship values. After the fall of the New Order in 1998, four constitutional amendments altered the political system by introducing direct presidential elections, creating new state institutions, reducing the MPR's role, and giving regional autonomy a constitutional basis. Indonesia remained a unitary state, while decentralisation laws gave substantial powers to provinces, districts, and cities.
The president is head of state, head of government, and commander-in-chief of the Indonesian National Armed Forces, and may serve no more than two five-year terms. The People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat, MPR) consists of elected members of the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, DPR) and the Regional Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Daerah, DPD). The MPR may amend the constitution, inaugurates the president and vice president, and may dismiss them under constitutional procedures. The DPR makes laws with the president, approves the state budget, and oversees the government. The DPD may propose, review, and advise on bills concerning regional government, but has less authority than the DPR.
Judicial power is held by the Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung), the courts beneath it, and the Constitutional Court (Mahkamah Konstitusi). The Supreme Court is the final court for most civil and criminal cases and reviews regulations below the level of statutes. The Constitutional Court reviews statutes against the constitution, settles conflicts between state institutions, rules on electoral disputes and petitions to dissolve political parties, and gives impeachment-related opinions. The Religious Courts (Pengadilan Agama) hear Islamic family, inheritance, and certain Islamic economic cases for Muslims. The Judicial Commission (Komisi Yudisial) proposes candidates for Supreme Court justices and has duties concerning judges' conduct.

Parties and elections
Since the 1999 election, Indonesia has had a fragmented multi-party system. No party has won an outright majority in legislative elections, and presidents have usually governed through broad coalitions that include many parties in the legislature and cabinet.
Political parties are often grouped into secular-nationalist and Islamic-oriented parties, but governing coalitions commonly include both. Party competition often relies more on patronage and elite bargaining than detailed policy programmes, although religious issues remain a source of ideological difference. Opposition parties have at times joined presidential power-sharing arrangements after elections.
Indonesia held its first general election in 1955. Since 2004, voters have directly elected the president, the DPR, and the DPD every five years. Members of the DPR are elected through party-based contests, while DPD candidates run as individuals to represent provincial constituencies. National elections require large-scale logistics, as ballots and other materials must reach remote islands, mountain areas, and places with limited infrastructure.

Administrative divisions
Indonesia is a unitary state divided into provinces, regencies, and cities, each with elected regional authorities regulated by law. Provinces are headed by governors and have provincial legislatures (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah, DPRD). Regencies (kabupaten) and cities (kota) are headed by regents (bupati) and mayors (wali kota) and have local legislatures (DPRD Kabupaten/Kota). Governors, regents, mayors, and DPRD members are elected. Regional autonomy after 1998 transferred substantial powers to subnational governments, especially regencies and cities. Below regencies and cities are districts (kecamatan), which are divided into villages. Rural villages (desa) have self-governing status, while urban villages (kelurahan) form part of district administration.
Special arrangements apply to nine provinces. Aceh may implement aspects of Islamic law; the six provinces in Papua have special autonomy that includes the Papuan People's Assembly, which represents indigenous Papuans in cultural and rights-related matters and Yogyakarta retains a hereditary sultanate within the republican system. Jakarta has autonomy at the provincial level because of its role as the national capital. In 2022, legislation established Nusantara in East Kalimantan as a special regional government area for the planned new capital. Jakarta will retain the status, functions, and role of the national capital until a presidential decree formally transfers the capital to Nusantara.

Foreign relations
Indonesia follows an "independent and active" (bebas aktif) foreign policy, a doctrine formulated by Mohammad Hatta in 1948. In practice, the doctrine has meant avoiding military alliances and rival power blocs while using diplomacy to pursue national interests. As a middle power, Indonesia relies on regional diplomacy, multilateral forums, and flexibility in dealing with larger powers.
As a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia has made the organisation a main arena of its regional diplomacy. It has long supported Palestinian statehood and has no formal diplomatic relations with Israel, although informal contacts, visits, and trade links have existed. In China–United States competition, Indonesia has avoided formal alignment with either power, supported ASEAN-led forums, and sought cooperation that does not heighten regional conflict.
Indonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950, apart from a brief absence from the organisation in 1965–66. It participates in multilateral forums including the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and the East Asia Summit. After decades as a major recipient of foreign aid, Indonesia now also provides development assistance and established a foreign aid agency in 2019. Since 1957, it has sent military and police personnel to UN peacekeeping missions, including Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali.

Military
The Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) comprises the Army (TNI-AD), Navy (TNI-AL), including the Marine Corps, and Air Force (TNI-AU). Active personnel number about 300,400 in the Army, 65,000 in the Navy, and 30,100 in the Air Force. The army developed out of the Indonesian National Revolution, and its leaders later claimed a political role because of their part in the struggle against Dutch rule. The TNI also built a territorial command structure that runs from regional commands to local posts, linking it to internal security and local administration.
During the New Order, the military held a formal political role under the doctrine of "dual function" (dwifungsi). Reforms after 1998 ended its formal parliamentary representation and removed it from day-to-day politics, but the territorial command system and off-budget military financing remained difficult to reform. Military businesses, foundations, and other funding sources have long raised concerns about transparency and civilian oversight. Defence spending has remained below 1% of GDP since 2007, and limited funding has pushed procurement toward foreign loans, second-hand equipment, and other lower-cost options.
Since independence, Indonesia has faced separatist movements and insurgencies, notably in Aceh and Papua. The insurgency in Aceh ended after a 2005 peace agreement, while conflict has continued in Papua alongside special autonomy and security measures. Reported abuses in Papua include torture, enforced disappearance, extrajudicial killing, arbitrary detention, and limits on assembly, expression, and the press.

Law enforcement and human rights
Law enforcement in Indonesia is primarily carried out by the Indonesian National Police (POLRI). The Chief of the Indonesian National Police (Kapolri), is under and responsible to the President, and post-1998 reforms separated the police from the military and made it responsible for internal security and public order. POLRI's duties include maintaining public order and security, protecting and serving the public, and enforcing the law.
Human-rights concerns include anti-Chinese racism, Papuan protests against racist treatment, and communal violence after 1998, including conflicts in Kalimantan and Maluku. Religious and gender minorities have faced discriminatory regulations, while anti-LGBT campaigns since 2016 have involved official statements, raids, and proposed legal restrictions.
The National Commission on Human Rights (Komnas HAM), established in 1993, is Indonesia's main state human-rights body and is authorised to promote, study, and investigate human-rights issues. Its work has faced limits from internal disputes, politicisation, and non-cooperation from some state bodies, including the Attorney General's Office and the armed forces.

Economy
Indonesia has a mixed economy in which the private sector and the government both have large roles. It is the only G20 member state in Southeast Asia, has the region's largest economy by GDP, and ranks among the top 20 in nominal terms and the top 10 by purchasing power parity. Services and industry account for the largest shares of gross domestic product, while agriculture remains a major source of employment.
The economy was once largely agricultural, and early post-independence policy centred on agricultural self-sufficiency. Industrialisation and urbanisation began in the late 1960s and accelerated in the 1980s, after falling oil prices led the government to promote manufactured exports. Manufacturing and non-oil exports grew in the 1980s and 1990s, during a period of rapid growth and falling poverty. The Asian financial crisis in 1997–98 caused a severe contraction, followed by recovery and reforms in banking, public finance, and exchange-rate management.
Household consumption accounts for a large share of GDP, supported by Indonesia's population, urbanisation, and expanding consumer class. Domestic demand helped soften the effect of the 2008 financial crisis, while exports, public spending, and private consumption contributed to the recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic. However, many workers remain in informal jobs, and businesses face infrastructure, regulatory, and governance obstacles.
The archipelago's geography affects where economic activity takes place and how goods move across the country. Inter-island transport and logistics costs are high, raising costs for production, investment, and the integration of regional markets. Economic activity is concentrated on Java, while many outer regions have weaker infrastructure and less diversified local economies.
Tourism is a major service industry and source of foreign-currency earnings, though international tourism is concentrated in Bali and other major gateways. Scientific and technological capacity has developed partly through state-backed strategic industries, including aircraft manufacturing and shipbuilding. Transport policy focuses on connecting major corridors, islands, and remote regions, while energy policy covers fossil-fuel production, electricity supply, and the shift toward renewables.
Natural resources remain economically important. Recent industrial policy has pushed for more domestic processing of raw materials, especially minerals such as nickel. Extractive industries produce commodities such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas, while agricultural exports include palm oil, coffee, and spices. The country also imports refined petroleum products and industrial inputs, and its major trade partners are primarily in Asia, alongside the United States.
Indonesia participates in regional and global economic arrangements, including ASEAN economic cooperation and APEC. Cheaper imported inputs after tariff reductions helped raise manufacturing productivity and, in some districts, coincided with lower poverty.

Tourism
Tourism is part of Indonesia's service economy, generating about US$14 billion in foreign-exchange earnings and recording 11.6 million international visitor arrivals in 2023. It supports jobs and businesses in accommodation, food services, transport, and related activities. International tourism is concentrated in Bali and other major gateways, while domestic travellers account for most tourism spending. Expanding tourism beyond established destinations depends on better infrastructure, workforce skills, investment conditions, and environmental planning.
Indonesia has natural, cultural, and historical tourism sites across the archipelago. Its UNESCO World Heritage Sites include Komodo National Park and the Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta, while sites on the tentative list include Bunaken National Park and the Raja Ampat Islands. Bali is the country's main destination for foreign tourists. Historical and urban heritage tourism includes Dutch colonial sites in Jakarta and Semarang.

Science and technology
Research and development expenditure in Indonesia has historically remained a small share of GDP. Its research and innovation system has low R&D spending, limited private-sector research, weak coordination among agencies, and uneven technology adoption.
Since the 1970s, Indonesia has used state-backed strategic industries to build domestic technological capacity. Indonesian Aerospace and PAL Indonesia have used technology transfer, licensed production, and foreign partnerships in aircraft manufacturing and shipbuilding. High costs, limited design capability, dependence on imported components, financing constraints, and small production scale continue to limit their competitiveness.
Indonesia established the National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (LAPAN) in 1963. Satellite programmes have supported domestic communications, remote sensing, and maritime monitoring, including the use of Automatic Identification System data from LAPAN-A2 and LAPAN-A3 satellites. LAPAN also conducted suborbital rocket and propellant research in support of longer-term launcher development.

Infrastructure
Transport
Transport in Indonesia serves a vast archipelago, while population and economic activity remain concentrated mainly on Java. Roads carry most passenger and freight traffic; on many smaller and less developed islands, inter-island shipping and air transport provide access to major markets. High logistics costs, port bottlenecks, and uneven infrastructure make goods movement expensive, especially outside the main western islands. Port availability and operations also affect internal trade and food-price gaps between provinces.
Land transport is most developed along the main population and economic corridors, especially on Java. In cities, formal public transport often operates alongside smaller public and paratransit modes, including bajaj, becak, angkot, minibuses, and motorcycle taxis. Public transport in many cities has not kept pace with urban growth, leading to heavy reliance on motorcycles and cars, while app-based ride-hailing has become part of daily travel.
Rail transport is concentrated on Java and Sumatra, with recent expansion into South Sulawesi. In dense urban regions, commuter and rapid-transit systems include the Greater Jakarta commuter network, Jakarta MRT, and Palembang LRT. In 2023, Indonesia opened its first high-speed rail line, Whoosh, linking Jakarta and Bandung through a project developed with China.
Maritime and air transport connect islands and long-distance routes beyond the main land corridors. Air transport serves domestic and international travel, with Soekarno–Hatta International Airport as the country's main international gateway and Ngurah Rai and Juanda International Airport among other major airports. Maritime transport is important to inter-island trade and logistics, with the Port of Tanjung Priok serving as the country's principal port and handling more than half of Indonesia's container traffic.

Energy
Indonesia produces more primary energy than it consumes. In 2023, industry and transport accounted for 40% and 36% of final energy consumption, respectively. Electricity supply is dominated by the state-owned State Electricity Company (Perusahaan Listrik Negara, PLN), which distributes power to most households and relies heavily on coal-fired generation. Extending the grid is difficult in sparsely populated and island areas, while reliability problems are reported even in places connected to the grid.
Indonesia had 70.8 gigawatts (GW) of installed power generation capacity in 2023. Coal is the largest source of primary energy consumption and electricity generation, with natural gas and petroleum also making large contributions. Renewables account for a smaller share of supply, although Indonesia has large hydropower, solar, geothermal, wind, ocean, and bioenergy resources. It is also among the world's leading geothermal producers.
Indonesia exports energy commodities, including coal and liquefied natural gas, while importing refined petroleum products. Although historically a leading LNG supplier, Indonesia has shifted more natural gas toward domestic use and gas-infrastructure expansion. Energy policy therefore has to manage both commodity production and reliable power supply across the archipelago.
Indonesia has set targets to increase renewable energy use and reduce emissions, including a net-zero emissions goal by 2060 or sooner. The transition is slowed by coal dependence, uncertain regulations, PLN's financial position, grid limits, and the cost of electrifying remote areas.

Demographics
Indonesia has a large and unevenly distributed population. The 2020 census recorded 270.2 million people, making Indonesia the world's fourth most populous country after India, China and the United States. Its population size places heavy demand on jobs, housing, education, health care, and public services.
The population is concentrated on Java and in urban centres, while many provinces outside Java and Bali are far less densely settled. Java is home to 56% of the population, making it the country's population centre. Its population density is far above the national average, reaching 1,171 people per square kilometre (3,030 people/mi2).
Indonesia has a median age of 31.5 years as of 2024 and a large working-age population. Jakarta anchors the country's largest metropolitan area and, under the UN's harmonised urban definition, is listed as the world's most populous city, with nearly 42 million inhabitants as of 2025. In the same year, approximately 59% of Indonesians lived in urban areas. Urbanisation has come from rural-to-urban migration, natural increase in urban areas, and the reclassification of rural settlements. It has also expanded metropolitan regions, especially on Java, and increased demand for infrastructure, basic services, and city management.
About 8 million Indonesians reside overseas, with large communities in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and Taiwan. A 2022 OECD report put the share of adults who intended to emigrate permanently at 2%, the lowest in ASEAN. Indonesian emigration is dominated by temporary labour migration, much of it to nearby or culturally and religiously familiar destinations such as Malaysia and Saudi Arabia.

Ethnic groups and languages
The 2010 census listed over 1,300 suku bangsa, or ethnic groups; a later study reclassified them into about 600 groups after noting classification difficulties. Austronesian-speaking populations predominate in much of western and central Indonesia; their spread across the islands involved migration, settlement, and mixing with older communities. Melanesian populations live mainly in the eastern islands, including parts of Nusa Tenggara, Maluku, and western New Guinea.
The Javanese are the largest ethnic group, making up about 40% of the population. They have filled many senior roles in government and the military, in proportions somewhat above their share of the population, although their population share has declined. Early Indonesian nationalists did not define the nation through a single ethnic tradition; they sought to accommodate ethnic difference within a united state. Other major groups include the Sundanese, Malay, Batak, Madurese, Betawi, Minangkabau, and Bugis.
The official language, Indonesian, is a standardized variety of Malay based on the Riau-Johor literary tradition. Malay had long served as a lingua franca in the archipelago before Indonesian nationalists adopted it as a language of unity through the 1928 Youth Pledge; it gained official status in 1945 under the name Bahasa Indonesia. Written in the Latin script, Indonesian has spread through education, government, and mass media, and serves as a common language across ethnic and regional boundaries.
Indonesia is also one of the world's most linguistically diverse countries, with more than 700 languages spoken across the archipelago. Most local languages belong to the Austronesian family, while eastern Indonesia includes more than 150 Papuan languages. Javanese is the most widely spoken local language and has official regional status in Yogyakarta. Several local languages also retain, or have historically used, distinct writing traditions. Local languages remain part of regional identity and cultural heritage, even as Indonesian dominates national public life.
Colonial-era European-descended communities were small. The 1930 census counted 246,000 Europeans in the Dutch East Indies, or 0.4% of the population, most of them Dutch nationals. Dutch did not become widely spoken: Malay was already the main lingua franca, and colonial policy promoted Malay while Dutch-language education remained largely limited to Europeans and a small indigenous elite. Dutch fluency today is limited, although the language is relevant to some civil and commercial codes whose official versions are still in Dutch.

Religion
Indonesia recognises six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism, while the constitution guarantees freedom to choose and practise religion and belief. The state regulates religious affiliation and public worship. Recognised religions receive administrative recognition for religious affiliation, marriages, and houses of worship, while followers of indigenous religions have often received weaker recognition or faced discrimination. Pancasila makes belief in one God one of the state ideology's five principles and is used to support national unity and religious harmony. Religious minorities still face discrimination, including local religious bylaws, social pressure, and restrictions on worship.
Indonesia has more Muslims than any other country, with 251 million Muslims in 2025, or 87.15% of the population. Protestants and Catholics together made up 10.44% of the population, and Christians form majorities in several eastern provinces. Hindus accounted for 1.66% and are concentrated in Bali, while Buddhists accounted for 0.69% and are found mainly among Chinese Indonesians, though not exclusively.
Many local belief systems predate the recognised religions and continue alongside them. They include beliefs in ancestors, spirits, and powers tied to places such as fields, forests, rivers, and mountains. Traditions such as Sunda Wiwitan, Kejawèn, and Kaharingan continue in different forms within or alongside the recognised religions. In Java and Bali, Islam and Hinduism also absorbed older customs and ritual practices.
Hinduism and Buddhism were the earliest major religions from outside the archipelago to become established there. Indian religious and cultural influence entered through trade, intermarriage, and religious activity, and became part of palace culture and local practice. Arabic geographers wrote about Southeast Asia by the 9th century, and Chinese records mention Muslim merchants and envoys by the 10th, while larger Muslim communities and polities developed from the late 13th century onward. Islamisation unfolded through commerce, religious teachers, and the rise of Muslim port polities and sultanates. Javanese traditions often present the Wali Sanga as the leading figures in the Islamisation of Java.
Christianity grew through Catholic and Protestant missions during the Portuguese and Dutch colonial periods, with different histories across regions and denominations. It became most established in parts of eastern Indonesia while remaining a national minority. Small Jewish communities also existed in the archipelago, but their numbers have been negligible since Indonesian independence.

Education
Indonesia's education system includes more than 50 million students and over 250,000 schools. It is managed across ministries responsible for school education, higher education, and religious education, and follows a 6-3-3-4 structure: six years of elementary school, three years each of junior and senior secondary school, and four years of tertiary education.
Since independence, schools have supported national integration through Indonesian-language instruction, national curricula, and civic education. Access and school quality differ across regions, especially between urban and rural areas and between western and eastern provinces. Net enrolment is highest at the primary level and lower at the secondary and tertiary levels.
Government spending on education accounted for approximately 1.3% of GDP in 2023. In 2022, Indonesia had 4,481 higher education institutions, including universities, Islamic institutions, service colleges, and open universities. The University of Indonesia, Gadjah Mada University, and the Bandung Institute of Technology are among the country's highest-ranked public universities in international rankings. Higher education supplies skilled workers and supports research, but tertiary attainment, access, and institutional quality are uneven.
Remaining problems include unequal access, uneven infrastructure, teacher quality and distribution, and low learning outcomes for many students. Student outcomes are generally stronger in urban and more developed areas than in many rural and disadvantaged areas. International assessments have also placed Indonesian students near the bottom in reading, mathematics, and science among participating economies.

Healthcare
After independence, Indonesia began building a public health sector, but hospitals and other services faced severe resource shortages. The number of health facilities and workers later increased, although long travel times, uneven hospital access, and workforce gaps remain in several provinces.
From the late 1960s, the government expanded basic healthcare through community health centres (puskesmas) in rural areas. Routine immunisation began in the 1970s, and oral polio vaccine was added in 1981 under the expanded immunisation programme. In 2014, Indonesia launched Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (JKN), a national health-insurance programme managed by the Social Security Agency on Health (BPJS Kesehatan). JKN is one of the world's largest single-payer health-insurance systems and covered 98% of the population in 2024, but differences remain in service access, health-worker distribution, referrals, and specialist care.
Health expenditure was 2.69% of GDP in 2022. Services are delivered through puskesmas, hospitals, and private providers. Life expectancy rose from 54.9 years in 1973 to 71.1 years in 2023, while child mortality declined from 15.5 deaths per 100 live births in 1972 to 2.1 deaths in 2022. Indonesia has also maintained polio-free status, although polio immunisation still requires sustained national and local support.
Indonesia faces a double burden of disease: non-communicable diseases account for a growing share of health loss, while communicable diseases remain a source of disability-adjusted life years. Air pollution contributes to illness and health costs in Jakarta, and malaria elimination remains difficult in parts of eastern Indonesia. Other continuing problems include child stunting, which affected 21.6% of children under five according to 2022 data, and maternal mortality, which remains high compared with many neighbouring countries.

Culture
Indonesia's cultures differ across islands, languages, and communities. Older populations and later Austronesian migrations contributed to this diversity, with Papuan and Melanesian populations prominent in the east. Sea trade and migration linked the islands with India, Arabia, Persia, China, mainland Southeast Asia, and later Europe; these contacts brought religions, scripts, court arts, and colonial rule, often first through ports and trading towns.
Indonesia has no single uniform cultural tradition. Regional arts and customs vary by local history, language, and community, while national forms use Indonesian and reach audiences across the country. These traditions include performance, visual art, ritual, clothing, food, and literature. Modern popular culture includes cinema, television drama, music, celebrity media, and reality shows, along with imported Asian dramas and global formats adapted for Indonesian audiences.
Indonesia has 16 items on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists, including wayang puppet theatre, batik, angklung, the saman dance, and pencak silat. Recent joint nominations have added pantun, kebaya, and kolintang to the list.

Art and architecture
Indonesian visual arts include textiles, puppetry, masks, carving, temple painting, and modern painting. Many are part of ritual and court life, mark status or regional identity, and have changed with trade, colonial rule, nationalism, tourism, and urban art communities.
Among regional traditions, Balinese painting includes classical Kamasan and Wayang-style narrative forms. Indonesian architecture ranges from everyday houses to ritual houses (rumah adat), whose layout, posts, roofs, heirlooms, and construction rites can mark ancestry, status, and local belief. Regional forms include the Javanese pendapa, Dayak longhouses, Minangkabau Rumah Gadang, and Toraja Tongkonan.
Sculptural traditions include megalithic monuments in parts of Java, Sumatra, Sulawesi, Nias, Sumba, Flores, and other regions. Ngaju Dayak hampatong figures have commemorative and protective functions, while Asmat artefacts are made for aesthetic and spiritual purposes. Ancient Indonesian sculpture from the 8th to 15th centuries includes Hindu and Buddhist stone, bronze, and gold works. Surviving temple architecture from the same period includes Borobudur and Prambanan.

Music, dance and clothing
Indonesian music and dance include court, village, ritual, and popular forms. Gamelan traditions are centred especially in Java and Bali, while angklung and other bamboo ensembles are used in western Java, Banyumas, and other regions. Drums, gongs, lutes, singing, and dance music also appear across the archipelago. Islamic musical forms include gambus and qasida, while popular genres include keroncong and dangdut, which grew from Melayu music and draws on Indian, Arabic, and Western pop and rock elements.
Dance traditions serve different uses across regions. Mask dances appear in Javanese court drama and Balinese ritual performance, while Dayak mask dances are performed in agricultural rituals and community ceremonies. Javanese court dance includes forms such as bedhaya and serimpi, while other local dances accompany theatre, music, trance, healing, harvest, and rites of passage. Younger performers also adapt global forms, including K-pop cover dance in Bali and hip-hop communities in Yogyakarta.
Clothing traditions differ by region and are used in ceremonies, weddings, formal occasions, and markers of local identity. Batik and kebaya are widely used in national and formal dress and are especially prominent in Javanese culture. Other regional textiles and clothing traditions include the Batak ulos, Malay and Minangkabau songket, and Sasak ikat, which are used in ceremonies, weddings, exchange, and formal events.

Theatre and cinema
Traditional Indonesian theatre uses storytelling, music, movement, puppetry, masks, and actor-dance. Wayang is a major puppet-theatre tradition in Java and Bali; many performances draw on the Ramayana and Mahabharata, are led by a dalang, and are accompanied by music. Wayang has been used for ritual, moral instruction, comedy, political comment, and public messaging.
Other theatrical traditions include Ludruk, Ketoprak, Sandiwara, and Lenong. The Minangkabau Randai uses music, dance, drama, and martial arts (silat) to perform legends and historical narratives. Balinese masked dance theatre, including topeng, has also been staged with modern stories and contemporary performance. In the modern period, theatre groups and networks, including Teater Koma, staged social criticism and political opposition during the late New Order period.
Indonesian cinema began during the Dutch colonial period with Loetoeng Kasaroeng (1926), and post-independence filmmaking developed through figures such as Usmar Ismail and Djamaluddin Malik. During the Sukarno era, film became part of nationalist and anti-colonial politics, while New Order cinema was subject to censorship, state regulation, and official histories. The large film industry of the 1970s and 1980s declined in the early 1990s.
After 1998, low-budget independent films, film communities, festivals, and returning commercial producers revived the industry. Kuldesak (1999) helped launch this independent film movement, while Ada Apa dengan Cinta? (2002) showed the commercial reach of post-Suharto cinema. Filmmakers addressed sexuality, city life, corruption, religion, and political memory, but state censorship, self-censorship, and pressure from non-state groups still limited expression. The Indonesian Film Festival (Festival Film Indonesia), first held in 1955, is the country's main national film-awards event.

Literature and mass media
Indonesian literature includes oral storytelling, inscriptions, court chronicles, religious texts, poetry, prose, and modern writing in Indonesian and regional languages. Early writing used Indian-derived scripts and later Malay and Islamic literary forms, including Kawi, Jawi, syair, pantun, hikayat, and babad. Well-known examples include Hikayat Hang Tuah in the Malay tradition and Babad Tanah Jawi in the Javanese tradition.
Modern Indonesian writing grew in the early 20th century through newspapers, Malay/Indonesian-language publishing, and the colonial publishing house Balai Pustaka. Sumatran, especially Minangkabau, writers were prominent in early modern literature, while later figures such as Chairil Anwar, Pramoedya Ananta Toer, and Ayu Utami became prominent at different points in modern Indonesian literature.
Indonesian mass media has operated under state rules, commercial ownership, and changing communications technology. During the New Order, newspapers and broadcasters worked under licensing, censorship, and television policies that promoted development and official ideas of national culture. In the Reformasi era, the 1999 Press Law forbade censorship, press bans, and publication permits, but criminal and civil cases, political pressure, and attacks by private groups continued.
Internet use began in the early 1990s and grew quickly after 2000; by 2023, Indonesia had over 210 million internet users, helped by affordable smartphones and wider mobile-broadband coverage. Mainstream outlets now use social-media distribution, shared newsrooms, shorter online formats, and cost-cutting.

Cuisine
Indonesian cuisine differs by island and region. Local crops, fish, spices, religion, trade, and migration all affect what people cook and eat. Food traditions use older local ingredients and techniques, along with later Indian, Chinese, Middle Eastern, Portuguese, Dutch, and other foreign influences.
Rice is the main staple food across much of the archipelago, usually consumed with side dishes of meat, fish, vegetables, and condiments. Common ingredients and seasonings include chilli, coconut milk, shrimp paste, peanuts, garlic, shallots, tamarind, fish, and chicken. Soy-based foods such as tempeh and tahu are also common, especially in Java and Bali.
Dishes such as nasi goreng, gado-gado, mie, and sate are consumed in many parts of the country. Regional cuisines include Minangkabau dishes such as rendang. Tumpeng, a Javanese ceremonial rice dish, is used in rites of passage, thanksgiving, and public celebrations.

Sports
Indonesia has international sports such as football, badminton, weightlifting, and basketball, alongside local games and martial arts. Football is one of the country's most followed sports, with active club supporters and public screenings of major matches. Indonesia was the first Asian representative to appear at the FIFA World Cup, taking part in the 1938 tournament as the Dutch East Indies.
Badminton is one of Indonesia's most successful international sports. Indonesia has won both the Thomas and Uber Cups, the world team championships of men's and women's badminton. Most of Indonesia's Olympic medals have come from badminton and weightlifting. Basketball also has a long organised history in the country, having appeared at the first National Sports Week in 1948 before the national basketball association was founded in 1951.
Local sports and games are used in ceremonies, harvest events, contests, and public entertainment. Examples include sepak takraw, bull racing (karapan sapi) in Madura, and ritual combat traditions such as caci in Flores and pasola in Sumba. Pencak silat is an Indonesian martial art and was included as an official event at the 2018 Asian Games, where Indonesia won all fourteen gold medals contested in the sport.

See also
List of Indonesia-related topics
Outline of Indonesia

Notes
References
Citations
Bibliography
Further reading
External links
Key Development Forecasts for Indonesia from International Futures

Government
Government Archived 12 May 2025 at the Wayback Machine – Official website of the Government of Indonesia
Presidency – official website of the president of Indonesia
Vice President – official website of the vice president of Indonesia
People's Consultative Assembly – official website of People's Consultative Assembly of the Republic of Indobesia
Regional Representative Council Archived 3 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine – official website of Indonesia Regional Representative Council
House of Representatives Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine – official website of Indonesia House of Representatives
Supreme Court – official website of the Supreme Court of Indonesia
Constitutional Court – official website of the Constitutional Court of Indonesia
Statistics – official website of Statistics Indonesia

History
"History" – Indonesian history at Repositori Institusi

Tourism
Wonderful Indonesia Archived 27 April 2025 at the Wayback Machine – Indonesia's official tourism portal

Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Indonesia
 Geographic data related to Indonesia at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Indonesia
Tourism in Indonesia is an important component of the Indonesian economy, as well as a significant source of its foreign exchange revenues. Indonesia ranked 20th in the world tourist industry in 2017, and ninth-fastest among all countries in tourist-sector growth, third-fastest in Asia and fastest in Southeast Asia. In 2018, Denpasar, Jakarta and Batam were among the ten cities globally with the fastest tourism growth at 32.7%, 29.2% and 23.3% respectively. Tourism ranked as the fourth-largest export earner among goods and services sectors.

In 2019, Indonesia recorded 16.10 million foreign tourist arrivals, seeing a 1.9% increase from 2018. In 2015, 9.73 million international visitors entered Indonesia, staying in hotels for an average of 7.5 nights and spending an average of US$1,142 per person during their visit, or US$152.22 per person per day. Singapore, Malaysia, China, Australia, and Japan are the top five sources of visitors to Indonesia.
The Travel and Tourism Development Index 2024 ranks Indonesia 22nd out of 119 countries overall with a Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index score of 4.46. This is a significant improvement for Indonesian tourism sector. In 2019, Indonesia ranked 40th out of 140 countries overall with an index score of 4.3. It is also an improvement from Indonesia's 2017 position of 42nd out of 136 countries overall with an index score of 4.2. The 2015 report ranked the price competitiveness of Indonesia's tourism sector the 3rd out of 141 countries. It mentions that Indonesia has quite good travel and tourism policy and enabling conditions (ranked 9th). The country also scores quite good on natural and cultural resources (ranked 17th). However, the country scored rather low in infrastructure sub-index (ranked 75th), as some aspects of tourist service infrastructure are underdeveloped.
In 2016, the government was reported to be investing more in tourism development by attracting more foreign investors. The government has given priority to 10 destinations as follows: Borobudur, Central Java; Mandalika, West Nusa Tenggara; Labuan Bajo, East Nusa Tenggara; Bromo-Tengger-Semeru, East Java; Thousand Islands, Jakarta; Lake Toba, North Sumatra; Wakatobi, Southeast Sulawesi; Tanjung Lesung, Banten; Morotai, North Maluku; and Tanjung Kelayang, Bangka Belitung Islands. As quoted in The Jakarta Post, the government is aiming for 275 million trips from domestic tourists by the end of 2019. The government has also secured commitments from potential investors, totalling US$70 million in the areas of building accommodation, marina and ecotourism facilities in 3 of the 10 areas. Indonesia is ranked at seventh place in the list of Lonely Planet's top 10 countries to visit in 2019. The country ranks fourth out of the top 25 destinations in the world in 2018 by the travel site TripAdvisor.

Overview
Indonesia's tourism industry benefits from a tropical climate, a vast archipelago of 17,508 islands, 6,000 of them being inhabited, and the second longest shoreline in the world (54,716 km) after Canada. It is the world's largest and most populous country situated only on islands. The beaches in Bali, diving sites in Bunaken, Mount Bromo in East Java, Lake Toba and various national parks in Sumatra are popular scenic destinations.  Indonesia has a rich cultural diversity, with 719 living languages used across the archipelago. The ancient Prambanan and Borobudur temples, Toraja, Yogyakarta, Minangkabau, and of course Bali, with its many Hindu festivities, are some of the popular destinations for cultural tourism.
Indonesia is a member of PATA and was the host of its annual conference in 1963 and 1974 in Jakarta, and in 2003 in Bali. Indonesia also was the host of PATA Travel Mart in 1985 and 1989 in Bali, and 2016 in Jakarta.
Tourism in Indonesia is currently overseen by the Indonesian Ministry of Tourism. International tourism campaigns have focused on the country's tropical coastlines and cultural heritage sites. Resort infrastructure has been developed in several popular destinations, particularly Bali. At the same time, the integration of cultural affairs and tourism under the scope of the same ministry shows that cultural tourism is considered an integral part of Indonesia's tourism industry, and conversely, that tourism is used to promote and preserve the cultural heritage.
Some of the challenges Indonesia's tourism industry has to face include the development of infrastructure to support tourism across the sprawling archipelago, incursions of the industry into local traditions (adat), and the impact of tourism development on the life of local people. The tourism industry in Indonesia has also faced setbacks due to problems related to security. Since 2002, warnings have been issued by some countries over terrorist threats and ethnic as well as religious conflicts in some areas, significantly reducing the number of foreign visitors for a few years. However, the number of international tourists has bounced back positively since 2007, and reached a new record in 2008 and kept rising since then.
The 2019 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report ranks Indonesia 40th out of 140 countries overall with a score of 4.3. It lists the price competitiveness of Indonesia's tourism sector the sixth out of 140 countries. The report states that Indonesia scores well on visa policy (#3) and international openness (#16), as well as on natural (#17) and cultural resources (#24). However, Indonesia has a low score in infrastructure (#98), as some aspects of tourist service infrastructure are underdeveloped. Other aspects that need to be improved include health and hygiene, environmental sustainability, and affinity for travel and tourism.

Historical context
Indonesia seems to have been a travel destination for centuries. Some panels in Borobudur bas-reliefs depicted drink vendors, warungs (small restaurants), and tavern or lodgings where people were drinking and dancing. The historical record of travel in Indonesia can be found since the 14th century. The Nagarakretagama reported that King Hayam Wuruk's royal travel throughout Majapahit realm in East Java had large numbers of carriages, accompanied by nobles, royal courtiers, officials and servants. Although it seems like a stately affair, in some instances the king's trip somewhat resembles a modern-day tour, as the king visited multiple modern tourism sites; from temples such as Palah and Jajawa, to enjoy the mountain scenery, having a bath in petirtaan (bathing pools) and going to the beach. The 15th-century travelogue of Bujangga Manik, a travelling Hindu scholar-priest from Pakuan Pajajaran, reported about his travel around Java and Bali. Although his travel was a pilgrimage one; visiting temples and sacred places in Java and Bali, sometimes he behaves like a modern-day tourist, such as sitting around fanning his body while enjoying beautiful mountain scenery in Puncak area, looking at Gede volcano that he describes as the highest point around Pakuan Pajajaran (capital of Sunda kingdom).

Initially the tourism, service and hospitality sector in Dutch East Indies were developed to cater the lodging, entertainment and leisure needs of domestic visitors, especially the wealthy Dutch plantation owners and merchants during their stay in the city. In the 19th century, colonial heritage hotels equipped with dance halls, live music and fine dining restaurants were established in Dutch East Indies urban areas, such as Hotel des Indes (est. 1829) in Batavia (now Jakarta), Savoy Homann Hotel (est. 1871) in Bandung, Hotel Oranje (est. 1910) in Surabaya, and Hotel De Boer in Medan. Since the 19th century Dutch East Indies has attracted visitors from The Netherlands. The first national tourism bureau was the Vereeniging Toeristen Verkeer, established by Governor-General of Dutch East Indies in early 20th century, and shared their head office in Batavia with Koninklijke Nederlansch Indische Luchtfahrt Maatschapijj or KNILM (which is not a KLM subsidiary despite the similar name) that began to fly from Amsterdam to Batavia in 1929. In 1913, Vereeneging Touristen Verkeer wrote a guide book about tourism places in the Indies. Since then Bali become known to international tourist with foreign tourist arrivals rose for more than 100% in 1927. Much of the international tourism of the 1920s and 1930s was by international visitors on oceanic cruises. The 1930s did see a modest but significant influx of mainly European tourists and long term stayers to Bali. Many came for the blossoming arts scene in the Ubud area, which was as much a two-way exchange between the Balinese and outsiders as it was an internal phenomenon.

Tourism more or less disappeared during World War II, Indonesian National Revolution and in the early years of the Sukarno era. On 1 July 1947, the government of Republic of Indonesia tried to revive tourism sector in Indonesia by establishing HONET (Hotel National & Tourism) led by R. Tjitpo Ruslan. This new national tourism authority took over many of the colonial heritage hotels in Java and renamed them all "Hotel Merdeka". After Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference in 1949, this tourism authority changed its name to NV HORNET. In 1952 the President formed the Inter-Departement 4 on Tourism Affairs which is responsible for reestablishing Indonesia as the world's tourism destination.

National pride and identity in the late 1950s and early 1960s was incorporated into the monumentalism of Sukarno in Jakarta — and this included the development of grand multi-storied international standard hotels and beach resorts, such as Hotel Indonesia in Jakarta (est. 1962), Ambarrukmo Hotel in Yogyakarta (est. 1965), Samudra Beach Hotel in Pelabuhan Ratu beach West Java (est. 1966), and Inna Grand Bali Beach Hotel in Bali (est. 1966). The political and economic instability of the mid-1960s saw radical tourism decline again. Bali, and in particular the small village of Kuta, was, however, in the 1960s, an important stopover on the overland hippy trail between Australia and Europe, and a "secret" untouched surf spot.
To stimulate the tourism sector, Indonesia became a member of PATA in the early 1960s, and appointed as the host of PATA annual conference in 1963 and 1974 in Jakarta, and 2003 in Bali. To host the 1974 PATA conference, the Hotel Borobudur was built and named as the official hotel of this event. At that time, it was the largest and the most luxurious hotel in Jakarta.
In the early-to-mid-1970s, high standard hotels and tourist facilities began to appear in Jakarta and Bali. After the completion of Borobudur restoration project in 1982, Yogyakarta became a popular tourist destination in Indonesia after Bali, mostly attracted to the 8th-century Buddhist monument, surrounding ancient Javanese temples and Yogyakarta Sultanate palace. From this period to the end of the Suharto era, governmental policies of the tourism industry included an array of regulations and developments to encourage increasing numbers of international tourists to both visit Indonesia and stay longer.

Statistics
Tourist arrivals
Source: Statistics Indonesia

Between January and November 2024, Indonesia recorded 12.66 million foreign visitor arrivals, the highest in five years and about 20.7% more than the same period in 2023, according to Statistics Indonesia (BPS).

Past arrivals statistics
The ten most popular tourist destinations in Indonesia recorded by Central Statistics Agency (BPS) are Bali, West Java, Central Java, East Java, Jakarta, North Sumatra, Lampung, South Sulawesi, South Sumatra, Banten, and West Sumatra (which would make it 11 provinces today due to Banten previously having been a part of West Java).
As with most countries, domestic tourists are by far the largest market segment. The biggest movement of domestic tourists is during Eid al-Fitr, locally known as lebaran. During this period, which is a two-week holiday after the month of fasting during Ramadan, many city-dwelling Muslim Indonesians visit relatives in their home towns. Intercity traffic is at its peak, and often an additional surcharge is applied during this time.
Over the five years up to 2006, attention has been focused on generating more domestic tourism. Competition amongst budget airlines has increased the number of domestic air travellers throughout the country. Recently, the Ministry of Labour legislated to create long weekends by combining public holidays that fall close to weekends, except in the case of important religious holidays. During these long weekends, most hotels in popular destinations are fully booked.
Since 2000, on average, there have been five million foreign tourists each year (see table), who spend an average of US$100 per day. With an average visit duration of 9–12 days, Indonesia gains US$4.6 billion of foreign exchange income annually. This makes tourism Indonesia's third most important non-oil–gas source of foreign revenue, after timber and textile products.
After toppling Japan two years ago, China as the world's biggest tourism spender now outranked Australia to become number three with a 30.42% increase year-on-year (y-o-y), while foreign tourists growth by 10.6% y-o-y set to more than 2.9 million. The top countries of origin Q1 2014 data comes from the Asia-Pacific region, with Singapore (15.7 per cent), Malaysia (14.0), China (11.0), Australia, and Japan among the top countries of origin.
Around 59% of all visitors are travelling to Indonesia for holiday purposes, while 38% are for business.
In 2012, according to the World Travel & Tourism Council, travel and tourism made a total contribution of 8.9% of GDP and supported 8% of total employment in Indonesia.

Nature tourism
Indonesia has a well-preserved, natural ecosystem with rainforests that stretch over about 57% of Indonesia's land (910,000 square kilometres or 225 million acres), approximately 2% of which are mangrove systems. One reason why the natural ecosystem in Indonesia is still well-preserved is because only 6,000 islands out of 17,000 are permanently inhabited. Forests on Sumatra and Java are examples of popular tourist destinations. Moreover, Indonesia has one of longest coastlines in the world, measuring 54,716 kilometres (33,999 mi), with a number of beaches and island resorts, such as those in southern Bali, Lombok, Bintan and Nias Island. However, most of the well-preserved beaches are those in more isolated and less developed areas, such as Karimunjawa, the Togian Islands, and the Banda Islands.

Dive sites
With more than 17,508 islands, Indonesia presents ample diving opportunities. With 20% of the world's coral reefs, over 3,000 different species of fish and 600 coral species, deep water trenches, volcanic sea mounts, World War II wrecks, and a very large variety of macro life, scuba diving in Indonesia is both excellent and relatively inexpensive. Bunaken National Marine Park, at the northern tip of Sulawesi, claims to have seven times more genera of coral than Hawaii, and has more than 70% of all the known fish species of the Western Indo-Pacific. Moreover, there are over 3,500 species living in Indonesian waters, including sharks, dolphins, manta rays, turtles, morays, cuttlefish, octopus and scorpionfish, compared to 1,500 on the Great Barrier Reef and 600 in the Red Sea. Tulamben Bay in Bali has the wreck of the 120 metres (390 ft) US Army commissioned transport vessel, the Liberty. Other popular dive sites on Bali are at Candidasa and Menjangan. Across the Badung Strait from Bali, there are several popular dive sites on Nusa Lembongan and Nusa Penida. Lombok's three Gilis (Gili Air, Gili Meno and Gili Trawangan) are popular, as is Bangka. Saronde Island is a very popular spot also in Gorontalo, Sulawesi. Some of the most famous diving sites in Indonesia are also the most difficult to reach, with places like Biak off the coast of Papua and the Alor Archipelago among the popular, more remote, destinations for divers.

Surf breaks
Surfing is also a popular water activity in Indonesia and the sites are recognised as world-class. The well-known locations are mostly located on the southern, Indian Ocean side of Indonesia, the largest breaks being on southern Java. The north coast does not receive the same surf from the Java Sea. Surf breaks can be found all the way along Sumatra, down to Nusa Tenggara, including Aceh, Bali, Banten, Java, Lombok, the Mentawai Islands, and Sumbawa. Although Indonesia has many world-class surfing spots, the majority of surfers come from abroad, especially Australia and the United States. Local enthusiasm for surfing began at Bali and West Java's Pelabuhan Ratu and Pangandaran beaches, with most surfers arriving from nearby cities of Jakarta and Bandung.
In 2018, World Surf League had eight surfing events in Indonesia.
On Bali, there are about 33 surf locations, from West Bali to East Bali including four on the offshore island of Nusa Lembongan. In Sumbawa, Hu'u and Lakey Beach in Cempi Bay are popular spots among surfing enthusiasts. Sumatra is the island, with the second greatest number of surf spots, with 18 altogether. High season for surfing is around May to September with the trade winds blowing from east to south-east. From October to April, winds tend to come from the west to north-west, so the east coast breaks get the offshore winds.
Two well-known surf breaks in Indonesia are the G-Land in the Bay of Grajagan, East Java, and Lagundri Bay at the southern end of Nias island. G-Land was first identified in 1972 when a surfer saw the break from the window of a plane. Since 6 to 8-foot (Hawaiian scale) waves were discovered by surfers at Lagundri Bay in 1975, the island has become famous for surfing worldwide.

National parks
Bogor Botanical Gardens established in 1817, and Cibodas Botanical Gardens established in 1862, are two among the oldest botanical gardens in Asia. With rich collections of tropical plants, these gardens are the centre of botanical research as well as tourism attraction since the colonial era.
There are 50 national parks in Indonesia, of which six are World Heritage listed. The largest national parks in Sumatra are the 9,500-square-kilometre (3,700 sq mi) Gunung Leuser National Park, the 13,750-square-kilometre (5,310 sq mi) Kerinci Seblat National Park and the 3,568-square-kilometre (1,378 sq mi) Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park, all three recognised as Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra on the UNESCO World Heritage list. Other national parks on the list are Lorentz National Park in Papua, Komodo National Park in the Lesser Sunda Islands, and Ujung Kulon National Park in the west of Java.
To be noticed, different national parks offer different biodiversity, as the natural habitat in Indonesia is divided into two areas by the Wallace line. The Wallacea biogeographical distinction means the western part of Indonesia (Sumatra, Java, Kalimantan) have the same flora and fauna characteristics as the Asian continent, whilst the remaining eastern part of Indonesia has similarity with the Australian continent.

Many native species such as Sumatran elephants, Sumatran tigers, Sumatran rhinoceros, Javan rhinoceros and orangutans are listed as endangered or critically endangered, and the remaining populations are found in national parks and other conservation areas. Sumatran orangutan can be visited in the Bukit Lawang conservation area, while the Bornean orangutan can be visited in Tanjung Puting national park, Central Kalimantan. The world's largest flower, rafflesia arnoldi, and the tallest flower, titan arum, can be found in Sumatra.
The east side of the Wallacea line offers the most remarkable, rare, and exotic animals on earth. Birds-of-paradise, locally known as cenderawasih, are plumed birds that can be found among other fauna in Papua New Guinea. The largest bird in Papua is the flightless cassowary. One species of lizard, the Komodo dragon can easily be found on Komodo, located in the Nusa Tenggara lesser islands region. Besides Komodo island, this endangered species can also be found on the islands of Rinca, Padar and Flores.

Volcanoes
Hiking and camping in the mountains are popular adventure activities. Some mountains contain ridge rivers, offering rafting activity. Though volcanic mountains can be dangerous, they have become major tourist destinations. Several tourists have died on the slopes of Mount Rinjani, Indonesia's second-highest volcano and a popular destination for climbers visiting Lombok in eastern Indonesia. Popular active volcanoes are the 2,329-metre (7,641 ft) high Mount Bromo in the East Java province with its scenic volcanic desert around the crater, the upturned boat shaped Tangkuban Perahu and the volcanic crater Kawah Putih, north and south of Bandung respectively and both with drive-in access up to the crater, the most active volcano in Java, Mount Merapi near Yogyakarta, and the legendary Krakatau with its new caldera known as Anak Krakatau (the child of Krakatau). Gede Pangrango volcano in West Java is also a popular hiking destination, especially among domestic hikers.

In Sumbawa, Mount Tambora with its historical massive volcanic eruption back in 1815 that produced massive caldera also had gained attention among hikers. In the neighbouring island of Flores, the three-coloured volcanic crater-lake of Kelimutu is also hailed as one of Indonesia's natural wonder and had attracted visitors worldwide. Puncak Jaya in the Lorentz National Park, the highest mountain in Indonesia and one of the few mountains with ice caps at the (tropical) equator offers the opportunity of rock climbing. In Sumatra, there are the remains of a supervolcano eruption that have created the landscape of Lake Toba close to Medan in North Sumatra.

Cultural tourism
Indonesia consists of over 600 ethnic groups, spread over a 1.8 million km2 area of 6,000 inhabited islands. This creates a cultural diversity, further compounded by Hindu, Buddhist, Islamic and European colonialist influences. In Bali, where most Indonesian Hindus live, cultural and religious festivals with Balinese dance-drama performances in Balinese temples are major attractions to foreign tourists.
Despite foreign influences, a diverse array of indigenous traditional cultures is still evident in Indonesia. The indigenous ethnic group of Toraja in South Sulawesi, still has a strong tradition that descends from animistic beliefs even though most Toraja are Christian now. One of the most famous Toraja traditions is their funeral rites, Rambu Solo. The Minangkabau ethnic group retain a unique matrilineal culture, despite being devoted Muslims. Other indigenous ethnic groups include the Asmat and Dani in Papua, the Dayak in Kalimantan and the Mentawai in Sumatra, where traditional rituals are still observed.

Cultural tourism also plays a significant part in Yogyakarta, a special province in Indonesia known as the centre of classical Javanese fine art and culture. The rise and fall of Buddhist, Hindu, and Islamic kingdoms in Central Java has transformed Yogyakarta into a melting pot of Indonesian culture. Classical Javanese dances are performed in royal courts of Yogyakarta and Surakarta, as well as Javanese Ramayana Ballet performed in Prambanan open-air theatre.
Most major Indonesian cities have their state-owned museums, although most are in modest display. The most complete and comprehensive museum that displays Indonesian culture and history spanned from prehistoric to colonial era is National Museum of Indonesia located in Jakarta.
For Indonesian and foreign visitors unable to visit all Indonesian provinces, Taman Mini Indonesia Indah in East Jakarta provides a comprehensive microcosm of Indonesian culture. Established in 1975 by Tien Suharto, this park displays museums, separate pavilions with the collections of Indonesian architecture, clothing, dances and traditions all depicted impeccably.

Ancient Hindu and Buddhist temples
From the 4th century until the 15th century, Hinduism and Buddhism shaped the culture of Indonesia. Kingdoms rise and fall, such as Mataram kingdom, Srivijaya, Kediri, Singhasari and Majapahit. Along with the Indonesian classical history of Hindu-Buddhist era, they produced some temples and monuments called candi. The best-preserved Buddhist shrine, which was built during the Sailendra dynasty in the 8th century, is Borobudur temple in Central Java. A giant stone mandala stepped pyramid adorned with bell-shaped stupas, richly adorned with bas-reliefs telling the stories and teachings of Buddha.

A few kilometres to the southeast is the Prambanan complex, the largest Hindu temple in Indonesia built during the second Mataram dynasty. The Prambanan temple is dedicated to Trimurti; Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma, three highest gods in Hinduism. Both the Borobudur and the Prambanan temple compounds have been listed in the UNESCO World Heritage list since 1991. Both temples are the largest and the most popular, conveniently accessible from Yogyakarta, the heartland of Javanese culture. The Ramayana Javanese dance is performed routinely on the stage near Prambanan temple, providing visitors with a glimpse of Javanese classical culture.
In and around Jogjakarta, ancient Javanese archaeology and temple enthusiasts may still discover numerous ancient temples, accessible by car or motorcycle. Although not as grand and popular as Borobudur and Prambanan, these smaller temples provide a glimpse of ancient culture and the intricate details of ancient Java temple architecture. Mendut and Pawon temples are located in Kedu Plain near Borobudur, while Ratu Boko, Sewu, Lumbung, Plaosan, Kalasan, and Sari are located in Prambanan Plain near Prambanan temple.

The temples of East Java dated from the era of Singhasari and Majapahit; mostly located in Trowulan archaeological site, and also scattered around Blitar and Malang. Although not as grand and popular as the temples of Central Java, the East Javanese temples are also an interesting destination for candi and Indonesian ancient history enthusiasts. East Javanese temples such as Wringin Lawang, Brahu, Bajang Ratu, and Candi Tikus in Trowulan archaeological site. Jawi temple near Pandaan, south of Surabaya, Penataran temple in Blitar, Kidal temple and Singhasari temple near Malang.
Most major Indonesian archaeological sites are equipped with museums; such as Samudra Raksa Museum and Karmawibhangga Museum in Borobudur, Prambanan museum in Prambanan temple compounds, and Trowulan Museum located in former Majapahit capital of Trowulan archaeological site. Some of the archaeological discoveries are also displayed in municipal museums, such as Sonobudoyo Museum in Yogyakarta and Radyapustaka Museum in Surakarta, and of course the Indonesian National Museum in Jakarta.
Sumatra is also home to several ancient Buddhist temples mostly linked to the Srivijaya kingdom, such as Muaro Jambi in Jambi province, Muara Takus in Riau and Biaro Bahal in North Sumatra. Sumatran temples, however, are not as elaborate and spectacular as their Javanese counterparts, and are subsequently less popular. The location is rural, quite far from large cities, so renting a car to visit these sites is advisable since public transportation to the location is scarce.

Islamic heritage
Islam has also contributed greatly to the cultural society in Indonesia. As of 2006, 88% of Indonesia's recorded population were Muslim. Islamic culture is prominent in Sumatra, and a few of the remaining sultanate palaces can be seen in Medan and Tanjung Pinang.
The Islamic heritage tourism is also popular, especially among Indonesian Muslims and Muslims from neighbouring countries such as Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei that share common Southeast Asian Islamic heritage. The tourist activity is usually linked with Islamic ziyarat pilgrimage to historical Islamic sites, such as historical mosques and tombs of venerated Islamic figures. However, for visitors in Islamic sites, either local or foreign, Muslim or non-Muslim, the rules of conduct and dress modesty is applied, such as removing the footwear while entering mosques or makam (tombs), a visitor should not enter the site wearing shorts (sarong usually lent near the entrance to cover the lower torso of the visitors).

In Aceh the Baiturrahman Grand Mosque and tombs of Aceh Sultanate kings is a popular destination, while in Medan the Medan Great Mosque and Maimun Palace is also a major Islamic heritage destination. Most of the major Indonesian cities have their own historical or monumental Masjid Agung (Grand Mosque) that has become their city's landmark as well as a tourism attraction. Istiqlal Mosque, Jakarta, the Indonesian national mosque and the largest in Southeast Asia is Jakarta's major landmark as well as a tourist attraction.
In Java the ziyarat pilgrimage is usually linked to historically important Islamic figures of Wali Sanga (Nine Saints). They are important because of their historic role in the spread of Islam in Indonesia. Their tombs and mosques scattered along with Java's north coast towns, such as Demak, Kudus, Cirebon, Gresik, to Ampel in Surabaya. The 15th-century Agung Demak Mosque hailed as the first mosque established in Java. Menara Kudus Mosque is notable for incorporating Majapahit Hindu-Javanese architecture. The tomb of Sunan Gunungjati near Cirebon, is also the important ziyarat site in West Java.
The heritage tourism might also be focused on the era of 17th- to 19th-century royal Javanese courts of Yogyakarta Sultanate, Surakarta Sunanate and Mangkunegaran.

Colonial heritage
Heritage tourism is focused on specific interest in Indonesian history, such as colonial architectural heritage of the Dutch East Indies era in Indonesia. The colonial heritage tourism mostly attracted visitors from the Netherlands that share historical ties with Indonesia, as well as Indonesian or foreign colonial history enthusiasts.
The activities among others are visiting museums, churches, forts and historical colonial buildings, as well as spending some nights in colonial heritage hotels. The popular heritage tourism attractions are Kota – the centre of old Jakarta, with its Maritime Museum, Kota Intan drawbridge, Gereja Sion, Wayang Museum, Stadhuis Batavia, Fine Art and Ceramic Museum, Toko Merah, Bank Indonesia Museum, Bank Mandiri Museum, Jakarta Kota railway station, and Glodok (Jakarta Chinatown). In the old ports of Sunda Kelapa, in Jakarta and Paotere in Makassar the tall-masted pinisi ship still sailed. The Jakarta Cathedral with neo-gothic architecture in Central Jakarta also attracts architecture enthusiasts.

Bandung historical avenue around Asia Afrika and Braga Street displays rich collections of Indies and Art deco architecture from the early 20th century. Several hotels such as Savoy Homann in Bandung and Hotel Majapahit in Surabaya are colonial heritage hotels suitable for those who are interested in Dutch East Indies colonial history. The VOC forts can be found in Yogyakarta, Makassar, Bengkulu and Ambon. Colonial buildings can also be found in old town districts of various Indonesian cities, with notable ones being in Semarang, Surabaya, Malang, Medan, and Sawahlunto.

Village tourism
Village tourism (Indonesian: desa wisata) is a tourism concept in Indonesia to integrate attraction, activity, accommodation, and supporting facilities within a specific area, called desa or village, to maximize tourism potential of that specific area. Unlike popular resort areas that are mostly owned by global hotel chains, village tourism is usually modest small-scale family or community-owned accommodations; i.e. boarding house, guest house, bed and breakfast, lodge, tavern, restaurant or warung shop. This community-based tourism model is intended to generate the local economy, create jobs, as well as empowering the local community.
Tourism potential may include natural points of interest, specific food, local activity, festivals, crafts, arts and cultural events that are unique to that area. Indonesia have 1,734 tourism villages, most of them located in Java and Bali.

Leisure and urban tourism
Leisure and urban tourism activities include shopping, sightseeing in big cities, or enjoying modern amusement parks, nightlife and entertainment. To some extent, urban tourism might also involve municipal culture and heritage tourism, such as visits to city museums or parts of the colonial old town.

Shopping
The nation's capital, Jakarta, offers many places for shopping. Mal Kelapa Gading, the biggest one with 130 square kilometres (50 sq mi), Plaza Senayan, Senayan City, Grand Indonesia, Sarinah, and Plaza Indonesia are some of the shopping malls in the city. Next to high-end shopping centres with branded products, Indonesia is also a popular destination for handicraft shopping in the region. Certain Indonesian traditional crafts such as batik, songket, ikat weaving, embroidery, wooden statue and fashion products are popular souvenirs for visitors.
Indonesian textile and fashion products are known for their good value; good quality with relatively cheap and reasonable price. Bandung is a popular shopping destination for fashion products among Malaysians and Singaporeans. Bali has many shopping centres, for instance, the Kuta shopping centre and the Galeria Nusa Dua.

Amusement and theme parks
Amusement parks are popular destinations for Indonesian families. Ancol Dreamland with Dunia Fantasi theme park and Atlantis Water Adventure is Jakarta's answer to Disneyland-style amusement park and water park. Several similar theme parks also developed in other cities, such as Trans Studio Makassar and Trans Studio Bandung.
Taman Mini Indonesia Indah (TMII) is one of the large theme parks.

Gastronomic tourism
Indonesia has rich and diverse culinary traditions, and might be considered as one of the richest and the best in the world; such as rendang that was recently voted as the number one dish of CNN International 'World's 50 Most Delicious Foods' list. Many regional cuisines exist, often based upon indigenous culture and foreign influences. Indonesian cuisine varies greatly by region and has many different influences. Some popular Indonesian dishes such as nasi goreng,  sate, and soto are ubiquitous in the country and have numerous regional variations. These dishes are considered as Indonesian national dishes.
Eating establishments in Indonesia are available from the modest street-side cart vendors, to the luxury fine-dining restaurants. Most of the malls and shopping centres in Indonesian major cities usually have an entire floor dedicated as food courts, where one can sample a rich variety of Indonesian cuisine, and some Indonesian cities have their own signature dishes. Such as Mie Aceh, Padang's rendang, Palembang's pempek, Jakarta's soto betawi and gado-gado, Bandung's siomay and batagor, Yogyakarta's gudeg, Solo's tongseng, Semarang's lumpia, Surabaya's rawon, Madura's satay, Balinese nasi campur and babi panggang, Makassar's konro, Manado's tinutuan, to Chinese Indonesian mie goreng. There are also regional food fairs and festivals, such as Jakarta Fair that offers local delicacies as well as food products from various corners of Indonesia, or Jakarta Fashion & Food Festival (JFFF), that features food and fashion.

Wellness and Spas
Indonesia has a local tradition of health and beauty treatments. However, it was not until 2000s that wellness tourism business has become particularly popular in Java and Bali. In 2009 and 2012, Indonesia won international wellness awards as the world's best spa destination.
Traditionally Indonesians—especially in Java and Bali—have developed their own traditional wellness treatment for health, beauty and wellbeing purposes. Traditional treatments include Javanese jamu herbal medicine, also Javanese and Balinese massage. Spas, fitness centres, and yoga classes are offered to tourists in major Indonesian cities, especially in Bali, Yogyakarta, Jakarta and Bandung. The Tourism Ministry of Indonesia has promoted Indonesia as a spa and wellness destination through various exhibitions.
Historically, the Taman Sari of Yogyakarta is a water castle built in 1758 that functioned as a pleasure garden for Sultan Hamengkubuwono I, his concubines and the royal family. This palace equipped with rooms and bathing pools served as a place to cleanse, purify and energize body and soul, restricted only for the king and royals, it was pretty much an 18th-century royal spa. Javanese royal treatments included jamu herbal medicine, traditional massage, luluran (herbal body scrub), bathing and aromatheraphy.
In 2019 Indonesian Tourism Ministry is also partnering with Indonesian Health Ministry to provide health tourism, in four sectors: medical tourism, wellness tourism and Jamu, sports tourism, and health academic tourism.

Golfing
Another popular tourist activity is golfing, a favourite sport among the upper class Indonesians and foreigners. Indonesia has around 150 golf courses. Golf courses concentrated mostly in Greater Jakarta, West Java, East Java, Bali, Bintan and Batam. Bali, West Java and Yogyakarta have well-designed golf courses, either by the sea or on highland overlooking volcanoes. Some notable golf courses include Taman Dayu in Pasuruan East Java, Ria Bintan, Damai Indah Golf Bumi Serpong Damai Tangerang, Rancamaya near Bogor, New Kuta Golf in Bali, and Merapi Golf near Yogyakarta.

Nightlife
Nightlife of Indonesia is also popular among foreigners, especially in the big cities like Jakarta, Bandung, Surabaya, Manado, Denpasar and Medan. Jakarta and Bali for example, are quite popular for its vibrant nightlife and festivals as the city boast its large numbers of discotheque and clubs. The annual Djakarta Warehouse Project dance music festival is a major Electronic Dance Music event in Asia.

Sex tourism
International sex tourism and child sex tourism remains an issue, especially on the islands of Batam and Karimun and in major urban centres and tourist destinations across the country, including Bali and Riau Islands. In Indonesia, prostitution is illegal and interpreted as a "crime against decency and morality". In practice, however, prostitution is quite widespread, tolerated, and somewhat regulated, mostly illegally or underground in discotheques, massage parlours, and karaoke rooms, and also visible on certain streets. It is estimated that 40,000 to 70,000 Indonesian children are being exploited in prostitution within the country. Prostitution is conducted by both genders, with Bali being notorious for its 'Kuta Cowboys', local gigolos targeting foreign female tourists.

Transportation
International airports

Each of the larger Indonesian islands has at least one international airport. The biggest and the busiest airport in Indonesia is Soekarno-Hatta International Airport in Jakarta, followed by Juanda International Airport in Surabaya as the second busiest airport in the country. There are four more international airports in Java, Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport, Yogyakarta International Airport, Jenderal Ahmad Yani International Airport, and Kertajati International Airport.
Bali, the tourism hotspot, has the I Gusti Ngurah Rai International Airport, which is the third busiest in Indonesia and one of the main entry points for foreign visitors.
There are seven international airports in Sumatra; Kualanamu International Airport in Medan, Sultan Iskandar Muda International Airport in Banda Aceh, Sultan Syarif Kasim II International Airport in Pekanbaru, Minangkabau International Airport in Padang, Sultan Mahmud Badaruddin II International Airport in Palembang, Hang Nadim International Airport in Batam, H.A.S. Hanandjoeddin International Airport in Tanjung Pandan.
In Kalimantan, there are three international airports, Supadio International Airport in Pontianak, Sultan Aji Muhammad Sulaiman Sepinggan International Airport in Balikpapan, and Syamsudin Noor International Airport in Banjarmasin. In Sulawesi, there are two international airports, Sam Ratulangi International Airport in Manado and Sultan Hasanuddin International Airport in Makassar, which is a major hub serving central and eastern Indonesia is also the 4th busiest.
Other international airports in Indonesia include Sentani International Airport in Jayapura, Lombok International Airport in the island of Lombok, and Komodo International Airport in the island of Flores.

Train
Indonesia is an archipelagic country. To explore Indonesia there are several alternatives. To have a different experience than flying on airplanes, travelers can use trains, ships and buses. Local transportation can be used to explore Indonesia. Trains can be used to travel between cities. As an example, to explore Java island travelers use the train to travel from Jakarta to Yogyakarta to visit Borobudur.
Indonesia also has a fast train service between Jakarta and Bandung, and local train services in and around Jakarta.

Ships
Bus
There are many bus operators, both inter-city and intra-city.

Angkot
An angkot is a small car that is used as local public transportation.

Taxi
There are several taxi operators in the city. There are also online taxis in big cities.

Motorcycle
There are online motorcycle services.

Marketing
Destination Management Organization

One program of the Central Government is the Destination Management Organization (DMO), an integrated promotion and management program which involves all stake holders in the tourism industry, including the local authority, business owners and local people. The DMO targets for 2010–2014 were 15 areas: Sabang, Toba, Jakarta Old City Area, Pangandaran, Borobudur, Tanjung Puting, Bromo-Tengger-Semeru, Batur Bali Area, Rinjani, Derawan Islands, Toraja, Bunaken, Wakatobi, Raja Ampat, Komodo-Kelimutu-Flores.

Indonesian tourism campaigns
The official Indonesian government authority that is responsible for the tourism sector in Indonesia is the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Indonesia. Several campaigns to promote Indonesian tourism have been launched, either by government or private sectors through various media such as print, television, and online.
Visit Indonesia Year 1991
Learning from neighbouring countries' success, such as Thailand, Singapore and Malaysia, which successfully gained benefits and exploited their tourism sectors through intensive promotions, in the early 1990s the Indonesian government launched integrated efforts to promote Indonesian tourism worldwide. The first integrated campaign was coined as Visit Indonesia Year, and the first year was the Visit Indonesia Year 1991.
Visit Indonesia Year 2008
The Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism declared 2008 as a Visit Indonesia Year. Visit Indonesia Year 2008 was officially launched on 26 December 2007. The figure of Visit Indonesia Year 2008 branding took the concept of Garuda Pancasila as the Indonesian way of life. The five components of Pancasila were represented by five different coloured lines and symbolised the Indonesian Unity in Diversity. The targeted number was 7 million. Visit Indonesia Year 2008 also commemorated 100 years of Indonesia's national awakening in 1908.
Visit Indonesia Year 2009

Tourism Indonesia Mart & Expo (TIME) 2009 was held at Santosa Villas & Resort in Senggigi on the west coast of Lombok NTB. Entering its 16th year of conduct, TIME 2009 was organised by the Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) and received the support of a wide number of tour participants in Indonesia.
TIME 2009 attracted 127 buyers from 25 countries. The top five buyers were from Korea, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, the United States, and the Netherlands. TIME 2009 also attracted a total of 250 delegates of Sellers from 97 companies of Indonesia occupying 84 booths at the exhibition. Sellers came from 15 provinces dominated by West Nusa Tenggara, Jakarta, Bali, Central Java, and East Kalimantan as the top five sellers. The percentage of sellers based on the industry was hotel, resort & spa (75%), NTO (10%), tour operator/travel agent (7%), adventure/activity holiday (3%), airline (1.5%), and others (hotel management, tourism board, tourism organization & travel portal 8.5%). During the 2008 financial crisis, TIME 2009 booked an estimated of the transaction of US$17.48 million, or increasing 15% from the previous TIME held in Makassar, South Sulawesi in 2008.
Visit Indonesia Year 2010

Following the hosting on the island of Lombok in 2009, the event was again hosted in Lombok-Sumbawa on 12–15 October 2010 at Santosa Villas & Resort in Senggigi on the west coast of Lombok. Entering its 16th year, TIME was organised by the Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board (ITPB) and supported by a wide number of tour participants in Indonesia. TIME 2010 was supported by the travel and tourism industry in Indonesia, including the Ministry of Culture & Tourism, the Provincial Government of West Nusa Tenggara, West Nusa Tenggara Culture & Tourism Office, Lombok Sumbawa Promo, Garuda Indonesia as official airline, other supporting airlines, Indonesia National Air Carriers Association (INACA), Board of Airline Representatives Indonesia (BARINDO), Association of Indonesian Tours & Travel Agencies (ASITA), Indonesia Hotels and Restaurant Association (PHRI), Indonesian Conference and Convention Association (INCCA), Pacto Convex as the event organiser, supported by national and international media. Lombok and Sumbawa in West Nusa Tenggara set a target of wooing one million tourists to visit the islands by 2012.
Wonderful Indonesia (since 2011)

Wonderful Indonesia has been the slogan since January 2011 of an international marketing campaign directed by the Indonesian Ministry of Culture and Tourism to promote tourism. The campaign replaced the previous "Visit Indonesia Year" campaign which had been used since 1991. The "Wonderful Indonesia" concept highlights Indonesia's "wonderful" nature, cultures, people, food, and value for the money. After the campaign was launched, Indonesia reported an increase of foreign visitors; from 7,002,944 in 2010, to 7,649,731 in 2011; and 8,044,462 in 2012.
In late January 2011, Culture and Tourism Minister Jero Wacik announced that "Wonderful Indonesia" would replace the previous "Visit Indonesia Year" branding used by the nation's official tourism promotional campaigns, although the logo of stylised curves Garuda remain. The minister announced that in 2010, foreign tourists visiting Indonesia touched 7 million and made predictions of 7.7 million in 2011. He was reported as describing the new branding as reflecting "the country's beautiful nature, unique culture, varied food, hospitable people and price competitiveness. "We expect each tourist will spend around US$1,100 and with an optimistic target of 7.7 million arrivals, we will get $8.3 billion," from this. The Culture and Tourism Minister added that 50 per cent of the revenue would be generated from about 600 meetings, conventions and exhibitions that were expected to take place in various places throughout the country in 2011. He further added in the announcements of January 2011 that his ministry would be promoting the country's attractions under the eco-cultural banner.
Pesona Indonesia (since 2014)
In December 2014, the new Minister of Tourism, Arief Yahya launched the new brand Pesona Indonesia to target the domestic tourism market. Both Wonderful Indonesia and Pesona Indonesia have the same Garuda logo. The minister hopes that both brands will be a single tourism identity for Indonesia.
2016

For most of the time, Indonesian tourism relies heavily on the charm of Bali as a drawing force to attract tourists. As a result, most foreign visitors are drawn and concentrated only in Bali, which already has quite well-developed tourism culture and infrastructure. To distribute the wealth of tourism and generate tourism-related economic opportunities among Indonesian provinces, the tourism authority launched a program to create and add new centres of attraction as an alternative for Bali.
In mid-2016, the Indonesian Ministry of Tourism launched a new program named "10 Priority Tourism Destinations (Indonesian: 10 Destinasi Wisata Prioritas)" dubbed as "the new Bali". The ten destinations are Borobudur Temple, Lake Toba, Mount Bromo, Komodo National Park, Kepulauan Seribu, Mandalika, Wakatobi Islands, Tanjung Kelayang beach, Tanjung Lesung beach, and Morotai island.
The efforts among others by creating and improving tourism infrastructure facilities including hotels, homestays, restaurants, handicraft and souvenir art markets, also improving interconnection into these regions by improving and constructing new airports. However, in practice by 2017 among these 10 priorities, only 4 of them that kick-off and received full government attention and supports; they are Lake Toba in North Sumatra, Borobudur in Central Java, Labuan Bajo as the gate into Komodo National park, and Mandalika in Lombok.

Challenges to the tourism industry
Terrorism
Although Indonesia had suffered terrorist attacks back in the 1980s, it was not until the 2000s that the attacks became disturbingly organized. The first major terrorist attack in Indonesia was the 2002 Bali bombing. This was a major blow to Indonesia's tourism industry. A series of travel warnings were issued by several countries. After the attack, the rate of tourism in Bali decreased by 32%.
After this 2002 attack, the following three years also suffered three major terrorist bombings: the 2003 Marriott Hotel bombing, the 2004 Australian embassy bombing in Jakarta, and a second bombing in Bali. Fortunately in 2008, no major terrorist attack occurred since 2005, and the United States Government lifted its warning against travel to Indonesia. In 2006, 227,000 Australians visited Indonesia, and in 2007, this tourist rate continued to rise with a recorded 314,000 tourists entering Indonesia.
In 2008, the US government lifted their travel warning on Indonesia.
By 2016, the terrorist threat was renewed and reactivated by the outbreak of ISIS-affiliated sleeper cells in the region. In 2016, Jakarta suffered a terrorist attack. And by 2018, numbers of terrorist attacks erupted in Surabaya and Pekanbaru.

Policies
Most of the major tourist destinations in Indonesia, especially Bali, Yogyakarta, Batam, Bandung and Jakarta, have a rather relaxed modern cosmopolitan social outlook, which is quite conducive for the tourism industry. However, certain regional provinces might not have that kind of luxury and tend to be conservative. In addition to national laws, certain Indonesian provinces have applied regional autonomous laws, some of them based on Islamic sharia law, such as Aceh province. Extra caution must be demonstrated by visitors to Aceh since the province has rather strict Islamic-based law, enforced by Islamic religious police, called the Wilayatul Hisbah in Indonesia.
Thus, some certain normally private matters, such as beach clothing (especially bikini), modesty issue, party and the consumption of alcohol, to a display of affections between a couple, are discouraged and frowned upon, and might lead to a legal problem. Carefulness and discretion are required, especially for unmarried couple and LGBT travellers.
The legal restriction against alcohol, pushed forward by Islamist parties and organizations in the country, is also harming the tourism and service sectors. As a result, the alcohol tax in Indonesia is among the highest in the world, which caused an unusually high price for alcoholic beverages. This policy is quite harmful to bar, club and restaurant industry in Indonesia.
Another unconducive policy is a rather strict policy on nightlife; local authority sometimes launched a raid on clubs, karaoke and discothèque in a pretext to curb down drugs and substance abuse in these places, which might be inconvenient for visitors. It was reported in April 2017 that the Indonesian government authorities arrested 32 foreign nationals for failing to show proper ID during a raid on an entertainment hub in Batam on 23 April 2017. Yudi Kurnain, a Batam Legislative Council member, had condemned the raid, saying that it might discourage tourism in the island. He was quoted as saying, "They should humanely conduct immigration checks, not through such repressive actions".
Since 2016, anti-LGBT sentiments are on the rise in the country, such as homophobia, hate crimes, raids, criminalization and harassment against LGBT locals and foreigners. The government's failure to curb Islamist attacks on LGBT people might damage the tourism sector and real estate development.

Regional conflicts
Another major threat to the tourism industry are sectarian and separatist conflicts in certain provinces of Indonesia. Decades of separatism-related violence in Aceh ended in 2005 with the signing of a peace agreement between the Indonesian Government and the Free Aceh Movement. Currently, Aceh is trying to develop its tourism sector, although they still have problems regarding unconducive policies such as strict enforcement of sharia law that may harm tourism development in the province.
While the tourism industry in Maluku and Central Sulawesi, which have suffered in recent years from serious sectarian conflicts, are currently recovering.
Papua on the other hand, is still affected by Papuan separatism, a small-scale regional conflict. The government and military has been accused of a "slow genocide" against native inhabitant, through transmigration from other densely populated Indonesian provinces that alter the demographic balance in the province. The government and military also has been accused for suppressing free speech in West Papua, after an expulsion of foreign journalists.

Environmental issues
Environmental issues also pose some problems in the Indonesian tourism sector: especially for nature conservation, marine, forest and national park-related tourism. Problems include deforestation, haze hazard caused by slash-and-burn practice that disrupts air transportation and health, also plastic garbage that pollutes marine life.
During the tropical dry season in 2015, Indonesia and its neighbours were hit by a massive haze, caused by slash and burn practice to clear the land in Sumatra and Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo). Riau suffered the worst, as the haze disrupted air transportation and caused a health hazard.
In March 2018, a diver showed footage of a popular diving site polluted with floating plastic garbage in Manta Point, Nusa Penida, around 20 kilometres off the coast of Bali. Bali sits in the middle of the Indonesian throughflow, a current that streams from the Pacific Ocean into the Indian Ocean through the string of straits of the Indonesian archipelago. This means that plastic waste could either be local or be brought in from as far away as the Pacific Ocean; either from within Indonesia, from neighbouring Malaysia and Philippines, or from faraway Asia-Pacific regions, carried away by sea currents.

Health issues
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia closed its borders to all travellers from China. This move impacted Indonesian tourism since Chinese travellers are the second-biggest foreign visitors to the country. The government is planning to spend $477 million in the form of tax cuts, discounts, and others to reduce the slump in the tourism sector. Foreign tourist arrivals at 3 (three) big gates from 26 main entrances in April 2020 compared to April 2019, namely: Ngurah Rai decreased by -99.94%; Soekarno-Hatta experienced a decrease of -99.79%, and Batam decreased by -99.27%. In March 2020, The Indonesian government has decided that Visa Free Arrival (BVK), Visa on Arrival and the Diplomatic / Free Service Visa policy are suspended for 1 month.

Guide books
Guide books and travel accounts with details of the country and people have had a long history – some books from the 19th century and early 20th-century being classics with a description of places that were perceived as things to see. Both private authors and government publications (such as the 1920s Come to Java books produced in Batavia by the government tourist bureau of the time) have been made each decade through to the present.
There were restrictions to tourism during World War II and the mid-to-late 1960s – other than those two periods – travel accounts and guide books have been produced regularly. James Rush's and Adrian Vickers' texts mentioned below are excellent introductions to the range of writing that has been created.
The most popular guide book on Indonesia in English from the 1970s to the 1990s was Bill Dalton's Indonesia Handbook, while from the 1990s onward, the Lonely Planet's Indonesia went to its tenth edition in 2010. Many other guide books have been produced in English and other languages.
Major international newspapers regularly have travel sections and stories about Indonesia. The journalists of tourism in Indonesia joined in the Indonesian Tourism Journalist Association (ITJA), Indonesian journalists active enough to write a variety of tourism information about the uniqueness found in this country.

Gallery
See also
Alcohol in Indonesia
Transport in Indonesia
Visa policy of Indonesia
Category:World Heritage Sites in Indonesia

References
Further reading
External links

Indonesia's official tourism website
Tourism in Indonesia

## Culture of Indonesia
The culture of Indonesia (Indonesian: Budaya Indonesia) has been shaped by the interplay of indigenous customs and diverse foreign influences. As the world's largest archipelagic country, it is home to over 600 ethnic groups, including Austronesian and Melanesian cultures, contributing to its rich traditions, languages, and customs. Indonesia is a melting pot of diversity. Positioned along ancient trade routes between the Far East, South Asia, and the Middle East, the country has absorbed cultural practices influenced by Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Islam, and Christianity. These influences have created a complex cultural tapestry that often differs from the original indigenous cultures.
Examples of the fusion of Islam with Hinduism include Javanese Abangan belief. Balinese dances have stories about ancient Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms, while Islamic art forms and architecture are present in Sumatra, especially in the Minangkabau and Aceh regions. Traditional art, music and sport are combined in a martial art form called Pencak Silat.
The Western world has influenced Indonesia in science, technology and modern entertainment such as television shows, film and music, as well as political system and issues. India has notably influenced Indonesian songs and movies. A popular type of song is the Indian-rhythmical dangdut, which is often mixed with Arabic, Javanese and Malay folk music.
Despite the influences of foreign culture, some remote Indonesian regions still preserve uniquely indigenous culture. Indigenous ethnic groups Batak, Nias, Mentawai, Asmat, Dani, Sumba, Dayak, Toraja and many others are still practising their ethnic rituals, customs and wearing traditional clothes.
Indonesia currently holds sixteen items of UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, including wayang puppet theatre, kris, batik, education and training in Indonesian batik, angklung, saman dance, noken, three genres of traditional Balinese dance, pinisi ship, pencak silat, gamelan, jamu, and reog. Additionally, pantun, kebaya, and kolintang were inscribed through joint nominations.

Traditional performing arts
Music
Gamelan is a traditional Indonesian musical ensemble, primarily associated with Java and Bali. It consists of various percussion instruments, including metallophones such as gambang and bonang, as well as gongs like kenong and gong ageng. Gamelan plays a vital role in cultural and religious ceremonies, shadow puppet performances (wayang), and traditional dance. Its layered melodies and interlocking rhythms create a distinctive sound that has influenced both Indonesian and international music. Beyond its artistic value, gamelan is deeply embedded in local traditions and community gatherings. Recognized by UNESCO in 2021 as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity, gamelan remains an essential part of Indonesia's musical heritage.

In West Sumatra, the Minangkabau people play talempong, a set of small knobbed gongs used in dance and ceremonies. Another key instrument is the saluang, a four-holed bamboo flute played with circular breathing, traditionally accompanying folk tales. In North Sumatra, the Batak people's music centers around gondang, a percussion ensemble of drums and gongs used in rituals. A notable variation is gordang sambilan, a set of nine large drums historically linked to royal ceremonies. The hasapi, a two-stringed wooden lute, is often played alongside singing in traditional Batak music. In Sulawesi, the Toraja people use pa’pompang, a bamboo instrument resembling a large flute ensemble with deep tones. The Bugis and Makassar people play the kacaping, a small plucked string instrument used in solo performances or to accompany storytelling. In Kalimantan, the Dayak people are known for the sape, a long-necked lute with intricate carvings, originally played in healing rituals and warrior dances but now popular in modern Dayak music. They also use gongs and other percussion instruments in communal events. In Papua, traditional music prominently features the tifa, a hand drum made from hollowed wood and animal skin, played in rhythmic patterns for dances and rituals. Bamboo wind instruments, such as flutes and panpipes, are also commonly used.

The angklung, a traditional musical instrument from West Java made from bamboo, has received international recognition from UNESCO as part of the intangible cultural heritage. Another unique instrument is the Sasando from East Nusa Tenggara, a harp-like instrument made from a split Lontar palm leaf, known for its soft, flowing melodies.
Kroncong is a traditional Indonesian music genre featuring guitars, ukuleles, and a distinctive rhythmic style. Introduced by Portuguese traders in the 15th century, it developed into regional styles such as Keroncong Tugu in North Jakarta and Maluku, which retain strong Portuguese influences. Another well-known variation is Keroncong Kemayoran from Jakarta. A modern adaptation, Pop Kroncong, blends traditional kroncong with contemporary element.
Other notable traditional music genres in Indonesia include Tanjidor from Betawi culture in Jakarta featuring a brass and woodwind ensemble, and Jaipongan from West Java, which blends Sundanese music with dance. In the 1960s, Indonesia's music scene evolved with modern kroncong and pop influences. On June 29, 1965, the band Koes Plus was imprisoned in Glodok, West Jakarta, for playing Western-style music, which was banned under Sukarno’s government. After his resignation, the restrictions were lifted, and Koes Plus became pioneers of Indonesian pop music.
Dangdut emerged in the 1970s, blending Javanese, Malay, Indian, and Arabic musical influences. Originating in Java, it quickly gained nationwide popularity with its distinctive drum beats and flute melodies. The genre later spread to neighboring countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei and has gained international recognition through diaspora communities and collaborations with global musicians.

Dance
Indonesian dance reflects the rich diversity of culture from the many ethnic groups that compose the nation of Indonesia. The dances showcase Austronesian roots, Melanesian tribal dance forms, and influences from foreign countries such as Indian subcontinent, Mainland China, and the Middle East, as well as European styles introduced during colonization. With over 3,000 distinct dances, each ethnic group contributes its own unique styles and traditions. Indonesian dances can be categorized into three historical eras: the Prehistoric Era, the Hindu-Buddhist Era, and the Islamic Era, and they fall into two main genres: court dance and folk dance.

In West Sumatra, Tari Piring (plate dance) is performed with dancers balancing plates while executing fast, precise movements. In Aceh, the Saman dance is known for its rapid, synchronized hand and body motions and was recognized by UNESCO in 2011 as an Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding. The Batak people's Tor-tor dance involves rhythmic footwork and deliberate gestures, often performed in rituals and celebrations. In Riau, the Melayu dance is characterized by fluid, elegant gestures, commonly seen in formal ceremonies. Zapin, performed in Jambi and Bangka Belitung, blends Arabic and local influences with lively footwork. In South Sumatra, Gending Sriwijaya reflects the legacy of the Srivijaya Empire, featuring graceful choreography set to rhythmic melodies.
In Java, Bedhaya and Serimpi are performed in the royal courts of Yogyakarta and Surakarta. Bedhaya, a sacred dance, is characterized by slow, deliberate movements that reflect spiritual harmony. Serimpi, known for its elegance, portrays Javanese mythology and royal traditions through refined gestures and synchronized patterns.

The Topeng (mask dance) is a traditional Javanese performance where dancers wear masks to portray characters from Javanese folklore, history, and mythology. Accompanied by gamelan, this dance blends drama and theatrical elements. Gambyong, a traditional dance from Surakarta, is performed in welcoming ceremonies and festive events, characterized by smooth, flowing movements. Kuda Lumping (Kepang Jaran) depicts riders on woven bamboo horses, often incorporating trance performances. Reog, from Ponorogo, features the massive "Singa Barong" (Javanese lion) mask, weighing over 30 kg, held by a performer using their teeth, alongside bold choreography and powerful percussion.

In Bali, traditional dance is deeply woven into religious and cultural life, categorized into Wali (sacred), Bebali (semi-sacred), and Balih-balihan (entertainment). UNESCO recognized these dance traditions as Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2015. Legong is distinguished by its intricate finger movements and precise footwork, often used to depict mythical tales. The Barong dance, a dramatic portrayal of the struggle between Barong (good) and Rangda (evil), features elaborate costumes and dynamic movements.
The Kecak dance, or the “Ramayana Monkey Chant,” is one of Bali's most iconic performances. This dynamic dance-drama features a large group of men chanting “cak” in unison, creating a mesmerizing rhythm that drives the storytelling. Inspired by scenes from the Hindu epic Ramayana, Kecak is not just a dance but a powerful theatrical experience, often performed against the dramatic backdrop of Bali's temples at sunset.
The Dayak people of Kalimantan perform the Hudoq dance, a masked ritual meant to invite spirits and ensure a good harvest. The Kancet Papatai dance reenacts scenes of ancient Dayak warriors, featuring energetic movements and traditional weapons. The Banjar people are known for Baksa kembang, a graceful dance performed at weddings and ceremonies, incorporating delicate hand movements and floral decorations as a symbol of beauty and prosperity.
In Sulawesi, Dero is a circle dance of the Kaili people in Central Sulawesi, performed during celebrations. In South Sulawesi, the Bugis Pakarena is a traditional dance with slow, graceful movements, performed by female dancers in elaborate costumes to the accompaniment of drum and flute music. Paraga from Makassar involves skillful footwork with a rattan ball, similar to sepak raga. Bosara, a traditional Bugis-Makassar dance, is performed by women with elegant hand gestures around a bosara (decorative tray), symbolizing hospitality and respect, often at welcoming ceremonies.
In the Maluku Islands, Cakalele is a war dance performed with shields and swords. Poco-Poco, a line dance from Ambon, became popular across Indonesia and internationally, especially in Southeast Asia. It is often performed in group exercises, social gatherings, and military drills. The dance gained attention in Malaysia but was banned in 2011 by some religious authorities due to perceived Christian influences. Despite this, Poco-Poco remains a beloved dance for recreation and fitness. In North Maluku, the Gala dance from the Sula Islands is traditionally performed to welcome guests and celebrate harvests or other festivities, with male and female dancers paired together.
In Papua, Sajojo is a popular group dance with energetic steps, often performed at festivals. Yospan is a social dance featuring dynamic footwork and leaps, commonly used to welcome guests. The War Dance of the Dani and Yali tribes involves stomping, spear formations, and rhythmic drumming. Tumbu Tanah, a highland dance, is performed by stomping the ground in unison to create a steady beat.

Drama and theatre
Wayang is a traditional shadow puppet theater from the Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese cultures, depicting stories from the Ramayana, Mahabharata, and local folklore. Wayang kulit, the most well-known form, uses intricately carved leather puppets mounted on bamboo sticks, manipulated behind a lit screen to cast moving shadows. The performances, led by a dalang (puppet master), serve as both entertainment and a medium for conveying moral and philosophical teachings. Recognized by UNESCO as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity, wayang remains an integral part of Indonesian cultural heritage.
Wayang wong, or "human wayang", is a form of Javanese theatre that adapts wayang stories into live dance dramas performed by actors. This tradition incorporates elaborate costumes, stylized movements, and traditional music to portray mythological tales and convey moral teachings. Performances are accompanied by a gamelan orchestra, which enhances the storytelling through rhythmic melodies. The dalang (puppet master) plays a central role, narrating the story, voicing characters, and guiding the overall performance
Ludruk, a theatrical tradition from East Java, blends comedy, drama, and audience interaction through improvised dialogue and local humor. Ketoprak, another Javanese theater form, incorporates music, dance, and historical or folkloric storytelling.
In West Java, Sundanese Sandiwara portrays historical and mythological tales through music and drama, while Lenong from Betawi features humorous storytelling, often with social satire. Ondel-ondel, a Betawi folk performance, showcases giant puppet figures paraded during festivals as a symbol of cultural heritage.

In West Sumatra, Randai integrates drama, music, dance, and the martial art "silek" (pencak silat), typically depicting Minangkabau legends. Bangsawan, popular in Riau and Malay-speaking regions, combines drama and music to present romantic or historical narratives.
Bali's theatrical traditions, deeply tied to dance and music, often retell epic stories with elaborate performances.
Modern performing art also developed in Indonesia with its distinct style of drama. Notable theatre, dance, and drama troupe such as Teater Koma are gaining popularity in Indonesia as their drama often portray social and political satires of Indonesian society.

Martial arts
Pencak Silat originated and was first developed on the islands of Java and Sumatra. Initially an art of survival, it spread across the Indonesian archipelago and became an integral part of local cultures. Centuries of tribal wars shaped silat into a combat skill used by warriors in ancient Indonesian kingdoms, where it also played a role in determining rank and status.
Over time, influences from Indian and Chinese martial arts further enriched silat. The practice spread outside Indonesia primarily through the diaspora, as people from areas such as  Aceh, Minangkabau, Riau, Bugis, Makassar, Javanese, Banjar, migrated to the Malay Peninsula and other islands, passing on their martial traditions to future generations. The Indonesian of half-Dutch descent are also credited as the first to have brought the art into Europe.
Pencak silat was used by Indonesian independence fighters during their struggle against Dutch colonial rule. However, after Indonesia gained independence, pencak silat declined in popularity among Indonesian youth compared to foreign martial arts like Karate and Taekwondo. This decline was partly due to the tradition of teaching pencak silat only within families, rather than openly, as well as the lack of media representation. Efforts have been made to revive interest in silat among Indonesian youth and to promote it internationally. Exhibitions, demonstrations, and state-sponsored initiatives have contributed to its growing recognition, particularly in Europe and the United States. The 2009 Indonesian film Merantau is one example of an effort to introduce pencak silat to the global stage.
Pencak Silat was recognized as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) on 12 December 2019.
Another martial art from Indonesia is Tarung Derajat. It is a modern combat system created by Haji Ahmad Drajat based on his experience as a street fighter. Tarung Drajat has been acknowledged as a national sport by KONI in 1998 and is now used by Indonesian Army as part of their basic training.
In Eastern Indonesia, a traditional martial art known as Caci involves whip or stick fighting. Originating from Flores in East Nusa Tenggara, Caci is also practiced in Bali and Lombok.

Traditional visual arts
Painting
The oldest known cave painting in the world, dated to at least 51,200 years ago, was discovered in Karampuang cave, Sulawesi, Indonesia. This painting depicts three human-like figures interacting with a wild boar, making it the earliest known narrative art. Previously, the oldest known figurative paintings were found in Lubang Jeriji Saléh cave, Borneo, estimated to be between 40,000 and 52,000 years old, and in Leang Bulu’ Sipong 4, Sulawesi, which features a hunting scene dated to at least 43,900 years ago. The earliest forms of cave art, including hand stencils and geometric shapes, have also been identified in the Maros Pangkep caves of Sulawesi, dating back over 44,000 years.

Indonesian painting before the 19th century is mostly restricted to the decorative arts, considered to be a religious and spiritual activity, comparable to the pre-1400 European art. Artists' names are anonymous since the individual human creator was seen as far less important than their creation to honour the deities or spirits. Some examples are the Kenyah decorative art, based on endemic natural motifs such as ferns and hornbills, found decorating the walls of Kenyah longhouses. Another notable traditional art is the geometric Toraja wood carvings. Balinese paintings are initially the narrative images to depict scenes of Balinese legends and religious scripts. The classical Balinese paintings are often decorating the lontar manuscripts and also the ceilings of temples pavilion.
Under the influence of the Dutch colonial power, a trend toward Western-style painting emerged in the 19th century. In the Netherlands, the term "Indonesian Painting" is applied to the paintings produced by Dutch or other foreign artists who lived and worked in the former Netherlands-Indies. The most famous indigenous 19th-century Indonesian painter is Raden Saleh (1807–1877), the first indigenous artist to study in Europe. His art is heavily influenced by Romanticism. In the 1920s Walter Spies settled in Bali, he is often credited with attracting the attention of Western cultural figures to Balinese culture and art. His works have somehow influenced Balinese artists and painters. Today Bali has one of the most vivid and richest painting traditions in Indonesia.
The 1920s to 1940s were a time of growing nationalism in Indonesia. The previous period of the romanticism movement was not seen as a purely Indonesian movement and did not develop. Painters began to see the natural world for inspiration. Some examples of Indonesian painter during this period are the Balinese Ida Bagus Made and the realist Basuki Abdullah. The Indonesian Painters Association (Persatuan Ahli-Ahli Gambar Indonesia or PERSAGI, 1938–1942) was formed during this period. PERSAGI established a contemporary art philosophy that saw artworks as reflections of the artist's individual or personal view as well as an expression of national cultural thoughts.

Wood carvings
The art of wood carving is quite well-developed in Indonesia. Other than tribal art woodcarvings of Asmat, Batak, Dayak, Nias, and Toraja area is well known for its refined wood carving culture; they are Jepara in Central Java and Bali. Mas village near Ubud in Bali is renowned for its wood carving art. Balinese woodcarving today has a sustained tourist market in Bali.
In South Papua, Asmat art consists of elaborate stylized wood carvings such as the bisj pole and is designed to honour ancestors. Many Asmat artefacts have been collected by the world's museums, among the most notable of which are those found in the Michael C. Rockefeller Collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City and the Tropenmuseum in Amsterdam. Bisj poles are carved by Asmat religious carvers (wow-ipits) after a member of their tribe or community had been killed and headhunted by an enemy tribe. Carved out of a single piece of a wild mangrove tree, Bisj poles can reach heights of up to 25 feet (7.62 m). Their carvings depict human figures standing on top of each other, as well as animal figures, phallic symbols, and carvings in the shape of a canoe prow. The Asmat participated in headhunting raids and cannibalism as rituals, many rituals involved the Bisj poles, including dancing, masquerading, singing and headhunting—all performed by men.

In North Sumatra, the people of Nias placed great value on wooden figures or adu. The sole purpose of the Nias figures was to fulfil ritual needs, whether it is to ensure wealth or to perform specific beneficial rite. Niassan figures vary in size, from as small as 20 centimetres (7.9 in) in height to more than 2 metres (6.6 ft) tall. When an elderly person died, the family would make a wooden statue known as adu zatua. The statue was unveiled on the fourth day after the death of the person. The shape of the wooden statue reflects the status of the person who used them: the more powerful the owner, the more impressive the statue will be made. Nias people believed that the deceased person's spirits reside in the statue, so all events that occurred in the family were shared with the ancestor statues through prayers. Ancestor statues were placed in the main room of the house, sometimes more than a hundred. A missionary work in 1930 had recorded the removal of 'over 2000 "idols" from a house of new northern convert.' Some missionaries even recorded houses collapsing under the weight of these ancestor figures. Small adu zatua were bound together horizontally using a rattan and pegs.
Many ancestor figures were destroyed in 1916 by Christian missionary movements which saw them as an old blasphemous religious symbol. Some were sold to collectors and can be found in museum or private collections around the world.
In Sulawesi, Torajans carve wood, calling it Pa'ssura (or "the writing"). One of the Toraja wood carvings is Tau tau, Tau tau is a kind of human statue made of wood or bamboo. Torajans believe that the dead can take their possessions with them to the afterlife, the effigies are usually equipped with small possessions. Traditionally, the effigies were simply carved, only to show the gender of the deceased. However, they have become more and more elaborate, actually attempting to imitate the likeness of the deceased. Nowadays, Tau tau has a photographic likeness to the people they represent.

Sculpture
Indonesia has a long history of stone, bronze and Iron Ages arts. Indonesia has a rich history of Hindu–Buddhist sculpture and architecture that has been shaped by a complex fusion of local, indigenous culture combined with foreign customs. Some Indonesian artifacts made from gold and bronze dating back to the 10th century are exhibited in the US. The megalithic sculptures can be found in numerous archaeological sites in Sumatra, Java to Sulawesi. The native Indonesians tribes have their own distinct tribal sculpture styles, usually created to depict ancestors, deities and animals. The stone sculpture artform particularly flourished in 8th-to-10th-century Java and Bali, which demonstrate the influences of Hindu-Buddhist culture, both as stand-alone works of art and also incorporated into temples. The most notable sculpture of the classical Hindu-Buddhist era of Indonesia are the hundreds of meters of relief and hundreds of stone buddhas at the temple of Borobudur in central Java. Approximately two miles of exquisite relief sculpture tell the story of the life of Buddha and illustrate his teachings. The temple was originally home to 504 statues of the seated Buddha.

The examples of notable Indonesian Hindu-Buddhist sculptures are; the statues of Hindu deities; Shiva, Vishnu, Brahma, Durga, Ganesha and Agastya enthroned in rooms of Prambanan temples, the Vishnu mounting Garuda statue of king Airlangga, the exquisite statue of Eastern Javanese Prajnaparamita and 3.7 meters tall Dvarapala dated from Singhasari period, and also the grand statue of Bhairava Adityawarman discovered in Sumatra. Today, the Hindu-Buddhist style stone sculptures are reproduced in villages in Muntilan near Borobudur also in Trowulan the former capital site of Majapahit in East Java, and Bali, and sold as a garden or pool ornament statues for homes, offices and hotels.
The walls of candi also often displayed bas-reliefs, either serve as decorative elements as well as to convey religious symbolic meanings; through describing narrative bas-reliefs. The most exquisite of the temple bas-reliefs can be found in Hindu and Buddhist temples. The first four terraces of Borobudur walls are showcases for bas-relief sculptures. These are exquisite, considered to be the most elegant and graceful in the ancient Buddhist world. The Buddhist scriptures describes as bas-reliefs in Borobudur such as Karmavibhangga (the law of karma), Lalitavistara (the birth of Buddha), Jataka, Avadana and Gandavyuha. While in Prambanan the Hindu scriptures is describes in its bas-relief panels; the Ramayana and Bhagavata Purana (popularly known as Krishnayana).
The bas-reliefs in Borobudur depicted many scenes of daily life in 8th-century ancient Java, from the courtly palace life, hermit in the forest, to those of commoners in the village. It also depicted a temple, marketplace, various flora and fauna, and also native vernacular architecture. People depicted here are the images of king, queen, princes, noblemen, courtier, soldier, servant, commoners, priest and hermit. The reliefs also depicted mythical spiritual beings in Buddhist beliefs such as asuras, gods, boddhisattvas, kinnaras, gandharvas and apsaras. The images depicted on bas-relief often served as a reference for historians to research certain subjects, such as the study of architecture, weaponry, economy, fashion, and also the mode of transportation of 8th-century Maritime Southeast Asia. One of the famous renderings of an 8th-century Southeast Asian double outrigger ship is Borobudur Ship.

Architecture
For centuries, Indonesian vernacular architecture has shaped settlements in Indonesia which commonly took the form of timber structures built on stilts dominated by a large roof. The most dominant foreign influences on Indonesian architecture were Indian, although European influences have been particularly strong since the 19th century and modern architecture in Indonesia is international in scope.

As in much of Southeast Asia, traditional vernacular architecture in Indonesia is built on stilts, with the significant exceptions of Java and Bali. Notable stilt houses are those of the Dayak people in Borneo, the Rumah Gadang of the Minangkabau people in western Sumatra, the Rumah Bolon of the Batak people in northern Sumatra, and the Tongkonan of the Toraja people in Sulawesi. Oversized saddle roofs with large eaves, such as the homes of the Batak and the tongkonan of Toraja, are often bigger than the house they shelter. The fronts of Torajan houses are frequently decorated with buffalo horns, stacked one above another, as an indication of status. The outside walls also frequently feature decorative reliefs.
Candi is an Indonesian term to refer to ancient temples. Before the rise of Islam, between the 5th to 15th-century Dharmic faiths (Hinduism and Buddhism) were the majority in the Indonesian archipelago, especially in Java and Sumatra. As a result of numerous Hindu temples, locally known as candi, constructed and dominated the landscape of Java. According to local beliefs, Java valley had thousands of Hindu temples that co-existed with Buddhist temples, most of which were buried in the massive eruption of Mount Merapi in 1006 AD.

Between 1100 and 1500 additional Hindu temples were built, but abandoned by Hindus and Buddhists as Islam spread in Java circa the 15th to 16th century. The 8th-century Borobudur temple near Yogyakarta is the largest Buddhist temple in the world and is notable for incorporating about 2,672 relief panels and 504 Buddha statues into its structure, telling the story of the life of the Buddha. As the visitor ascends through the eight levels of the temple, the story unfolds, the final three levels simply containing stupas and statues of the Buddha. The building is said to incorporate a map of the Buddhist cosmos and is a masterful fusion of didactic narrative relief, spiritual symbolism, monumental design and the serene meditative environs. The whole monument itself resembles a giant stupa, but seen from above it forms a mandala.
The nearby 9th-century temple complex at Prambanan contains some of the best-preserved examples of Hindu temple architecture in Java. The temple complex comprises eight main shrines, surrounded by 224 smaller shrines. The majority of Hindu temples in Java were dedicated to Shiva, who Javanese Hindus considered as the God who commands the energy to destroy, recombine and recreate the cycle of life. Small temples were often dedicated to Shiva and his family (wife Durga, son Ganesha). Larger temple complexes include temples for Vishnu and Brahma, but the most majestic, sophisticated and central temple was dedicated to Shiva.

Crafts
Indonesia is considered as home of world handicraft. Every ethnic group has its own uniqueness, style, and philosophy of crafting. Most of them are made from wooden, bone, fabric, stone, and paper. These natural materials were crafted using hands into
profitable and aesthetic items. Handicraft manufacturing serves not only as an important economic sector, but also a tradition and has a social function as well. The handicraft industry employs thousands of people in towns and villages across the country. About half a billion dollar worth of handicraft is exported every year, and many more is consumed domestically.
There are many varieties of handicraft from other regions. West Sumatra and South Sumatra are particularly noted for their songket cloths. Villages in the Lesser Sunda Islands produce ikat while provinces in Kalimantan are long known for their basketry and weaving using rattan and other natural fabrics. Wood art produced by the Asmat people of Papua is highly valued. Cities along Java's northern coast, Cirebon, Pekalongan, and Rembang are known as centres of batik. Cirebon and Jepara are important cities in furniture, producing rattan and carved wood respectively, while Tasikmalaya is known for embroidery. Pasuruan also produces furniture and other products and support stores
and galleries in Bali. Bandung and Surabaya, both modern, cosmopolitan, and industrialised cities—much like Jakarta but on a lesser scale—are creative cities with a variety of innovative startups.

Several Indonesian islands are famous for their batik, ikat and songket cloth. Once on the brink of disappearing, batik and later ikat, found a new lease on life when former President Suharto promoted wearing batik shirts on official occasions. In addition to the traditional patterns with their special meanings, used for particular occasions, batik designs have become creative and diverse over the last few years.
Other noted Indonesian crafts are Jepara wood carving and Kris. In 2005, UNESCO recognised Kris as one of Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity from Indonesia.
In 2012, Noken was listed in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists as a cultural heritage of Indonesia. Women carrying noken are still a common sight in Wamena.
Being the best-known Indonesian sailing-vessel, Phinisi became the tagline for the 2017 inscription of ''The Art of Boatbuilding in South Sulawesi'' in the UNESCO's Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.

Digital Preservation of Traditional Indonesian Arts
Digital preservation has emerged as a pivotal strategy for safeguarding Indonesia's diverse and rich traditional arts. By integrating modern technology and participatory media practices, art forms such as gamelan music, Balinese dance, and wayang kulit are being preserved for future generations. Through digital archives, animation, and interactive platforms, these traditions are transcending geographical and temporal barriers, ensuring global reach and continued cultural relevance.

Social Media Integration: Gamelan communities have utilized social media platforms like YouTube and Instagram to connect with global audiences, share performances, and foster cross-cultural appreciation. Community-led projects often host virtual workshops and live-stream performances, making traditional music accessible to younger and international audiences.
Museum-Led Digital Archives: Institutions such as the Museum Mpu Tantular in East Java employ participatory media to document and preserve traditional performances. These efforts include creating digital exhibits and interactive platforms that educate and engage the public, particularly younger generations.
Animated Cultural Storytelling: The animation series Si AA incorporates traditional gamelan music and folklore, presenting Indonesia's cultural heritage through a modern medium that resonates with international audiences. By blending traditional elements with contemporary storytelling, the series bridges cultural preservation and innovation.

Clothing
Indonesia's best-known national costumes are Batik and kebaya, although initially these costumes originated mainly from Javanese and Balinese culture, which are most prominent in Javanese, Sundanese and Balinese cultures. Because Java has become the political centre and population of Indonesia, the island's folk costume has been raised to national status. As a plural country, Indonesia has 38 provinces, each of which has representatives of traditional clothing from each province with unique and different designs. National costumes are worn at official occasions and traditional ceremonies. each province in Indonesia – more complete each group in Indonesia, has its own traditional costumes. The costumes of this area are in Indonesian called Pakaian tradisional or Pakaian adat, and are taken from traditional Indonesian textile traditions and crafts.

National costumes
Batik Shirt
Batik is a cloth that is traditionally made using a manual wax-resist dyeing technique to form intricate patterns. Traditionally batik cloth is a large piece of intricately decorated cloth used by Javanese women as kemben or torso wrap. Batik cloth was wrapped around the hips with multiple folds in front called wiron, while the upper torso wear kebaya fitted dress. Traditionally for men, the edge of batik cloth also can be sewn together to make a tubular cloth as sarong, or wrapped around hips as kain in a fashion similar to women's. Later for men, the batik cloth also is sewn and made into contemporary batik men's shirt. Today, Batik shirts, which are commonly worn by men in Indonesia (especially in Java), are usually worn during formal occasions; such as attending weddings, traditional ceremonies, formal meetings, communal gatherings, etc. Batik is recognized as one of the important identity of Indonesian culture. UNESCO designated Indonesian batik as a Masterpiece of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity on 2 October 2009.

Kebaya
The kebaya is the national costume of women from Indonesia, although it is more accurately endemic to the Javanese, Sundanese and Balinese peoples. It is sometimes made from sheer material such as silk, thin cotton or semi-transparent nylon or polyester, adorned with brocade or floral pattern embroidery. Kebaya usually worn with a sarong or batik kain panjang, or other traditional woven garment such as ikat, songket with a colorful motif. Kebaya is usually worn during official national events by Indonesian first lady, wives of Indonesian diplomats, and Indonesian ladies. It also worn by Indonesian ladies attending traditional ceremonies and weddings. During Balinese traditional ceremonies, Balinese women wore colorful Balinese style kebaya with songket Bali.

Songket
Songket is a hand-woven in silk or cotton, and intricately patterned with gold or silver threads. In Indonesia, songket is more prevalent in Sumatra and Lesser Sunda Islands (Bali, Lombok and Sumbawa), while in Java, batik is more popular. Various songket patterns are traditionally produced in Sumatra, Kalimantan, Bali, Sulawesi, Lombok and Sumbawa. In Sumatra the famous songket production centers are in Minangkabau Pandai Sikek area, West Sumatra, Jambi City. Jambi and Palembang, South Sumatra. In Bali, songket production villages can be found in Klungkung regency, especially at Sidemen and Gelgel. In the neighboring island of Lombok, the Sukarara village in Jonggat district, Central Lombok regency, is famous for songket making.

Peci
The Peci, also known as songkok or kopiah, is a cap traditionally worn by male Muslims in the Indonesian archipelago. It is quite similar to the Turkish-Egyptian fez. In Indonesia, the black velvet peci has become the national headdress with nationalist connotations made popular by Sukarno. A number of Indonesian nationalist movement activists in the early 20th century, wore a peci to convey their nationalistic sentiments and to demonstrate their Indonesian identity. Indonesian male presidents always wear a peci as part of their official presidential attire. Since then, the black velvet peci is approved to be the national head-dress for Indonesian men. It is worn all over Indonesia, especially by government officials and men (usually Muslim men) throughout the country. The peci is usually worn with a batik shirt or western-style suits by men in Indonesia for those attending formal occasions.

Foods
The cuisine of indonesia has been influenced by Chinese culture and Indian culture, as well as by Western culture. However, in return, Indonesian cuisine has also contributed to the cuisines of neighbouring countries, notably Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei, where Padang or Minangkabau cuisine from West Sumatra is very popular. Also, Satay (Sate in Indonesian), which originated from Java, Madura, and Sumatra, has gained popularity as a street vendor food from Singapore to Thailand. In the 15th century, both the Portuguese and Arab traders arrived in Indonesia with the intention of trading for pepper and other spices. During the colonial era, immigrants from many countries arrived in Indonesia and brought different cultures as well as cuisines.
Most native Indonesians eat rice as the main dish, with a wide range of vegetables and meat as side dishes. However, in some parts of the country, such as Papua and Ambon, the majority of the people eat sago (a type of tapioca) and sweet potato.

Indonesian dishes are usually spicy, using a wide range of chilli peppers and spices. The most popular dishes include nasi goreng (fried rice), Satay, Nasi Padang (a dish of Minangkabau) and soy-based dishes, such as tahu and tempe. A unique characteristic of some Indonesian food is the application of spicy peanut sauce in their dishes, as a dressing for Gado-gado or Karedok (Indonesian style salad), or for seasoning grilled chicken satay. Another unique aspect of Indonesian cuisine is using terasi or belacan, a pungent shrimp paste in dishes of sambal oelek (hot pungent chilli sauce). The sprinkling of fried shallots also gives a uniquely crisp texture to some Indonesian dishes.
Chinese and Indian cultures have influenced the serving of food and the types of spices used. It is very common to find Chinese food in Indonesia such as dimsum and noodles, and Indian cuisine such as Tandoori chicken. In addition, Western culture has significantly contributed to the extensive range of dishes. However, the dishes have been transformed to suit Indonesian tastes. For example, steaks are usually served with rice. Popular fast foods such as Kentucky Fried Chicken are served with rice instead of bread and sambal (spicy sauce) instead of ketchup. Some Indonesian foods have been adopted by the Dutch, like Indonesian rice table or 'rijsttafel'.
In 2023/2024, TasteAtlas rated Indonesian cuisine as the sixth best cuisine in the world. Indonesian cuisine is placed behind Italian, Japanese, Greek, Portuguese, and Chinese cuisines, making Indonesian the best-rated cuisine in Southeast Asia.

Mythology and folklores
The mythology of Indonesia is very diverse, the Indonesian people consisting of hundreds of ethnic groups, each with their own myths and legends. The stories within this system of lore often incorporate supernatural entities and magical creatures which form parts of Indonesian mythology. Others relate to creation myths and place naming legends that are often intertwined with historical figures and events. Ancient rituals for healing and traditional medicine as well as complex philosophies regarding health and disease can also be found.
These native mythologies are relatively free from foreign influences, such as Torajans, Nias, Bataks, Dayaks and Papuans. By contrast, Javanese, Balinese, and to some degree Sundanese were influenced by Hindu-Buddhist Indian mythology as early as the 1st century CE. Hindu gods, legends and epics such as Ramayana and Mahabharata were adopted and adapted into a uniquely local form.
Hindu-Buddhist mythical beings have a role in Javanese and Balinese mythology, including Hindu gods and heroes, devatas, asuras, apsaras (known as hapsari or bidadari), kinnaras, etc., while native gods of nature such as Semar, Dewi Sri, and Nyai Loro Kidul are either given identified as their Hindu counterpart or incorporated into a Java-Bali Hindu pantheon unknown in India. For example, native rice goddess Dewi Sri is identified with Lakshmi the shakti of Vishnu, and Semar and his sons the Punakawans are incorporated into the epic of Mahabharata in Javanese wayang kulit, as the clown servants of the Pandawas. Several names refer to gods, such as Dewa (devas), Dewi (devi), dewata (devatas), and in native traditions usually referred to as Batara (male god) and Batari (female goddess).
After the coming of Islam to the Indonesian archipelago, Islamic mythology especially those dealing with spiritual beings, such as devils, demons, jinns and angels entered Indonesian mythology. In Sumatra, Malay, Aceh and Minangkabau mythology was almost entirely supplanted by Islamic mythology. However, belief in local spirits such as the forest guardian, the ghost of water or haunted places still exists, often associated with a jinn or the tormented soul of a deceased human.

Literature
Early Indonesian literature originates in Malay literature, and the influence of these roots was felt until well into the twentieth century. The phrase "Indonesian literature" refers to Indonesian as written in the nation of Indonesia, but also covers literature written in an earlier form of the language, i.e. the Malay language written in the Dutch East Indies. Pramoedya Ananta Toer was Indonesia's most internationally celebrated author, having won the Magsaysay Award as well as being considered for the Nobel Prize in Literature. Other important figures include the late Chairil Anwar, a poet and member of the "Generation 45" group of authors who were active in the Indonesian independence movement. Tight information controls during Suharto's presidency suppressed new writing, especially because of its ability to agitate for social reform.
In the book Max Havelaar, Dutch author Multatuli criticised the Dutch treatment of the Indonesians, which gained him international attention.
Modern Indonesian authors include Seno Gumira Adjidarma, Andrea Hirata, Habiburrahman El Shirazy, Ayu Utami, Gus tf Sakai, Eka Kurniawan, Ratih Kumala, Dee, Oka Rusmini. Some of their works have translated to other languages.
Poetry has a long tradition in Indonesia, particularly among ethnically Malay populations, of extemporary, interactive, oral composition of poetry. These poems are referred to as pantun. Contemporary Indonesian poets include among others, Sutardji Calzoum Bachri, Rendra, Taufiq Ismail, Afrizal Malna, Binhad Nurrohmat, Joko Pinurbo, Nyoman Tusthi Eddy, and Sapardi Djoko Damono. In written poetry and prose, a number of traditional forms dominate, mainly: syair (traditional narrative poetry), gurindam (brief aphorisms), hikayat (stories, fairy-tales, animal fables, chronicles), babad (histories or chronicles).
On 15 December 2020 the Pantun is recognized as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization).

Recreation and sports
Many traditional games are still preserved and popular in Indonesia, although western culture has influenced some parts of them. Among three hundred officially recognised Indonesian cultures, there are many kinds of traditional games: cockfighting in Bali, annual bull races in Madura, horse racing in Sumbawa and stone jumping in Nias. Stone jumping involves leaping over a stone wall about up to 1.5 m high and was originally used to train warriors. Pencak Silat is another popular form of sport, which was influenced by Asian culture as a whole. Another form of national sport is sepak takraw. The rules are similar to volleyball: to keep the rattan ball in the air with the players' feet.
Popular modern sports in Indonesia played at the international level include football (soccer), badminton and basketball. Badminton is one of Indonesia's most successful sports. Indonesian badminton athletes have played in Indonesia Open Badminton Championship, All England Open Badminton Championships, and many international events, including the Summer Olympics and won Olympic gold medals since badminton was made an Olympic sport in 1992. Rudy Hartono is a legendary Indonesian badminton player, who won All England titles seven times in a row (1968 through 1974). Indonesian teams have won the Thomas Cup (men's world team championship) thirteen of the twenty-two times that it has been contested since they entered the series in 1957. In the internationally popular sport of football (soccer), Indonesian teams have been active in the Asian Football Confederation (AFC).
Sporting events in Indonesia are organised by the National Sports Committee of Indonesia (KONI). The committee, along with the government of Indonesia, has set a National Sports Day every 9 September with "Sports for All" as the motto. Indonesia has hosted the Southeast Asian Games four times, in 1979, 1987, 1997 and 2011, and won the overall champion title in each of these years. As of 2011, Indonesia has won champion titles 10 times overall out of 18 SEA Games it has attended since debuted in 1977. The country also hosted the 1993 Asian Basketball Championship. Besides that, it has also hosted the Asian Games twice, the 1962 Asian Games and the 2018 Asian Games.

Popular media
Cinema
The largest chain of cinemas in Indonesia is 21 Cineplex, which has cinemas spread throughout twenty-four cities on the major islands of Indonesia. Many smaller independent cinemas also exist.
In the 1980s, the film industry in Indonesia was at its peak, and dominated the cinemas in Indonesia with movies that have retained a high reputation, such as Catatan Si Boy and Blok M and actors like Onky Alexander, Meriam Bellina, Nike Ardilla and Paramitha Rusady. The film Tjoet Nja' Dhien (1988) winning 9 Citra Awards at the 1988 Indonesian Film Festival. It was also the first Indonesian movie chosen for screening at the Cannes Film Festival, where it was awarded Best International Film in 1989. However, the film industry failed to continue its successes in the 1990s, when the number of movies produced decreased significantly, from 115 movies in 1990 to just 37 in 1993. As a result, most movies produced in the 1990s contained adult themes. The industry started to recover in the late 1990s, with the rise of independent directors and many new movies produced, such as Garin Nugroho's Cinta dalam Sepotong Roti, Riri Riza and Mira Lesmana's Petualangan Sherina and Arisan! by Nia Dinata. Another form of recovery is the re-establishment of the Indonesian Film Festival (FFI), inactive for twelve years, and the creation of the Jakarta International Film Festival. Daun di Atas Bantal (1998) received Asia Pacific Film Festival in Taipei.

Television
Radio
The public radio network Radio Republik Indonesia (RRI) was founded in 1945. It consists of a network of regional stations located in all provinces of the archipelago. In most cities and large towns there are also many commercial stations. Since 2006, several digital radio stations have been based in Jakarta and Surabaya, using Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) and Hybrid HD-Radio.

Religion and philosophy
Islam is Indonesia's main religion, with almost 88% of Indonesians declared Muslim according to the 2000 census, making Indonesia the most populous Muslim-majority nation in the world. The remaining population is 9% Christian (of which roughly two-thirds are Protestant with the remainder mainly Catholic, and a large minority Charismatic), 2% Hindu, and 1% Buddhist.
The Pancasila, the statement of two principles that encapsulate the ideology of the Indonesian state, affirms that  "The state shall be based on the belief in the one and only God".

Celebrations
See also
Demographics of Indonesia
List of libraries in Indonesia
List of museums and cultural institutions in Indonesia
National Intangible Cultural Heritage of Indonesia

References


== Further reading ==

## Cuisine of Indonesia
Indonesian cuisine is a collection of regional culinary traditions of the various ethnic groups that form the archipelagic nation of Indonesia. There are a wide variety of recipes and cuisines in part because Indonesia is composed of approximately 6,000 populated islands of the total 17,508 in the world's largest archipelago, with more than 600 ethnic groups.
There are many regional cuisines, often based upon indigenous cultures, with some foreign influences.

Tradition and characteristics
Indonesia has around 5,350 traditional recipes, with 30 of them considered the most important. Indonesia's cuisine ranges from rice, noodle and soup dishes in modest local eateries to street-side snacks to elaborate dishes in expensive restaurants.
Indonesian cuisine varies greatly by region and has many different influences. Sumatran cuisine, for example, has Middle Eastern and Indian influences, featuring curried meat and vegetables such as gulai and curry, while Javanese cuisine is mostly indigenous, with some hints of Chinese influence.
The cuisines of Eastern Indonesia are similar to Polynesian and Melanesian cuisine. Elements of Chinese cuisine can be seen throughout Indonesian cuisine: foods such as noodles, meat balls, spring rolls, and wontons have been completely assimilated.
Throughout its history, Indonesia has been involved in trade due to its location and natural resources. The country's indigenous techniques and ingredients were influenced by India, the Middle East, China, and Europe. Spanish and Portuguese traders brought New World produce even before the Dutch came to colonize most of the archipelago. Indonesia's Moluccas Islands (Maluku), which are famed as "the Spice Islands", contributed to the introduction of spices such as cloves and nutmeg to Indonesian and global cuisine.
Indonesian cuisine often has complex flavours, acquired from certain ingredients and bumbu spice mixtures. Indonesian dishes have rich flavours; usually described as savory, hot and spicy, and also combination of basic tastes such as sweet, salty, sour and bitter. Most Indonesians favour hot and spicy food, thus sambal, Indonesian spicy chili sauce with various optional ingredients, notably shrimp paste, shallots, and others, is a staple condiment at all Indonesian tables. The seven main Indonesian cooking methods are frying, grilling, roasting, dry roasting, sautéing, boiling and steaming.

Some popular Indonesian dishes such as nasi goreng, gado-gado, satay, and soto are ubiquitous in the country and are considered national dishes. The official national dish of Indonesia is tumpeng, chosen in 2014 by Indonesian Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy as the dish that binds the diversity of Indonesia's various culinary traditions. Later in 2018, the same ministry has chosen 5 national dishes of Indonesia; they are soto, rendang, satay, nasi goreng, and gado-gado.

Today, some popular dishes that originated in Indonesia are now common to neighbouring countries, Malaysia and Singapore. Indonesian dishes such as satay, beef rendang, and sambal are popular in Malaysia and Singapore. Soy-based dishes, such as variations of tofu and tempeh, are also very popular. Tempeh is regarded as a Javanese invention, a local adaptation of soy-based food fermentation and production. Another fermented food is oncom, similar in some ways to tempeh but using a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and particularly popular in West Java.

History
Indonesian cuisine has a long history—although most of it is not well-documented, and relied heavily on local practice and oral traditions. An exception is Javanese cuisine, which has quite a well-documented culinary tradition.
The diversity ranges from ancient bakar batu or stone-grilled yams and boar practiced by Papuan tribes of eastern Indonesia, to sophisticated contemporary Indonesian fusion cuisine. The ethnic diversity of Indonesian archipelago provides an eclectic combination — mixing local Javanese, Sundanese, Balinese, Minang, Malay and other native cuisine traditions, with centuries worth of foreign contacts with Indian traders, Chinese migrants and Dutch colonials.

Rice has been an essential staple for Indonesian society, as bas-reliefs of 9th century Borobudur and Prambanan describes rice farming in ancient Java. Ancient dishes were mentioned in many Javanese inscriptions and historians have succeeded in deciphering some of them. Inscriptions from the 8th to 10th century Kingdom of Mataram era mention several ancient dishes, among others are hadaŋan haraŋ (minced water buffalo meat satay, similar to modern Balinese sate lilit), hadaŋan madura (water buffalo meat simmered with sweet palm sugar), and dundu puyengan (eel seasoned with lemon basil). Also various haraŋ-haraŋ (grilled meats) either celeṅ/wök (pork), hadahan/kbo (water buffalo), kidaŋ/knas (deer) or wḍus (goat). Ancient beverages include nalaka rasa (sugarcane juice), jati wangi (jasmine beverage), and kinca (tamarind juice). Also various kuluban (boiled vegetables served in spices, similar to modern urap) and phalamula (boiled yams and tubers served with liquid palm sugar). Other ancient vegetable dishes include rumwah-rumwah (lalap), dudutan (raw vegetables) and tetis.
The 9th century Old Javanese Kakawin Ramayana mentions cooking technique as Trijata offered Sita some food (canto 17.101); scrumptious food of landuga tatla-tila (cooked with oil) and modakanda sagula (sugared delicacies).
Several foods are mentioned in Javanese inscriptions dated from the 10th to 15th centuries. Some of this dishes are identified with present-day Javanese foods. Among others are pecel, pindang, rarawwan (rawon), rurujak (rujak), kurupuk (krupuk), sweets like wajik and dodol, also beverages like dawet.
In the 15th century Sundanese manuscript Sanghyang Siksa Kandang Karesian, it was mentioned the common Sundanese food flavours of that times which includes; lawana (salty), kaduka (hot and spicy), tritka (bitter), amba (sour), kasaya (savoury), and madura (sweet).
By the 13th to 15th century, coastal Indonesian polities began to absorb culinary influences from India and the Middle East, as evidence with the adoption of curry-like recipes in the region. This was especially the case in the coastal towns of Aceh, Minangkabau lands of West Sumatra, and Malay ports of Sumatra and Malay peninsula. Subsequently, those culinary traditions displayed typical Indian culinary influences, such as kare (curry), roti cane and gulai. This also went hand in hand with the adoption of Islamic faith, thus encouraged halal Muslim dietary law that omits pork. On the other hand, the indigenous inhabitant that resides inland—such as the Bataks and Dayaks, retains their older Austronesian culinary traditions, which incorporate bushmeat, pork and blood in their daily diet.

According to the 17th century account of Rijklof van Goens, the ambassador of the VOC for Sultan Agung's Javanese Mataram court, meat (sheep, goat, and buffalo) was prepared for celebrations in Java by grilling and frying the seasoned meat. Unlike Europeans, the Javanese primarily use coconut oil instead of butter.
Chinese immigrants settled in the Indonesian archipelago as early as the Majapahit period, circa 15th century CE, and came in larger numbers during the Dutch colonial period. The Chinese settlers introduced stir-frying technique that required the use of the Chinese wok and a small amount of cooking oil. They also introduced some new Chinese cuisine—including soy sauce, noodles and soybean processing technique to make tofu. Subsequently, soybean processing led to the possibly accidental discovery of tempeh (fermented soybean cake). The earliest known reference to tempeh appeared in 1815 in the Javanese manuscript of Serat Centhini.
Indonesian culinary traditions have been exposed to various influences. The vigor of spice trade during the Age of Discovery has brought European traders to Indonesian shores. Subsequently, European colonialism was established in the 19th century Dutch East Indies. The influences of European cuisine—most notably Portuguese and Dutch, introduced European techniques, especially in terms of bread-making, pastries, cookies and cake-baking.
Each region has developed a specificity that ultimately leads to localization of regional taste.

Customs, serving and consumption
Indonesian traditional meals usually consists of steamed rice as staple, surrounded by vegetables and soup and meat or fish side dishes. In a typical family meal, the family members gather around the table filled with steamed rice and several other dishes. Each dish is placed in a large communal plate or in bowls. Each of these dishes has its own serving spoons, used only to move food from the communal plate to one's personal plate. Each of the family members has their own personal plate that is first filled with steamed rice. Usually the oldest family member or the husband has the right to initiate the meal, followed by the rest of the family to help themselves with the dishes. Each of them take some portion of dishes from the communal plates into their own individual plates.

On their personal plate, the steamed rice will soon be surrounded by two, three or more dishes; vegetables and fish or meat, and maybe some fried dishes, sambal and krupuk. In Indonesian customs — unlike in Japanese their counterpart — it is quite acceptable to be seen to mix the various dishes on a personal plate during consumption. A practice commonly found in nasi campur, nasi Padang, or during a buffet. The soupy dish might be served in a separate small personal bowl. Today in contemporary Indonesian restaurants, a set menu is often offered. This has led to the personal serving practice, in a similar fashion to those of Japanese cuisine, with a personal plate on a tray, a rattan or bamboo container each with a separate small portion of dishes surrounding the rice. This can be found in the presentation of nasi Bali.

Indonesian meals are commonly eaten with a spoon in the right hand and fork in the left hand (to push the food onto the spoon). Unlike the European dining custom, knives are absent from the dining table, thus most of the ingredients such as vegetables and meat are already cut into bite-size pieces prior to serving. In some parts of the country, such as West Java, Gorontalo and West Sumatra, it is also common to eat with one's bare hands.
In restaurants or households that commonly use bare hands to eat, such as seafood food stalls, traditional Sundanese and Minangkabau restaurants, or East Javanese pecel lele (fried catfish with sambal) and ayam goreng (fried chicken) food stalls, kobokan is usually served along with the food. Kobokan is a bowl of tap water with a slice of lime in it to give a fresh scent. This bowl of water is not intended for consumption, rather it is used to wash one's hand before and after eating.
Chopsticks are generally only used in food stalls or restaurants serving Indonesian adaptations of Chinese cuisine, such as bakmie or mie ayam (chicken noodle) with pangsit (wonton), mie goreng (fried noodles), and kwetiau goreng (fried flat rice noodles).

Staples
Rice
Rice is a staple for all classes in contemporary Indonesia and occupies a central place in Indonesian culture: it shapes the landscape; is sold at markets; and is served in most meals both as a savoury and a sweet food. The importance of rice in Indonesian culture is demonstrated through the reverence of Dewi Sri, the rice goddess of ancient Java and Bali. Traditionally the agricultural cycles linked to rice cultivations were celebrated through rituals, such as Seren Taun rice harvest festival.
Rice is most often eaten plain with just a few protein and vegetable dishes on the side. It is also served as nasi uduk (rice cooked in coconut milk), nasi kuning (rice cooked with coconut milk and turmeric), ketupat (rice steamed in woven packets of coconut fronds), lontong (rice steamed in banana leaves), intip or rengginang (rice crackers), desserts, vermicelli, noodles, arak beras (rice wine), and nasi goreng (fried rice). Nasi goreng is omnipresent in Indonesia and considered a national dish.

Rice was only incorporated into diets as either the technology to grow it, or the ability to buy it from elsewhere, was gained. Evidence of wild rice on the island of Sulawesi dates from 3000 BCE. Evidence for the earliest cultivation come from the eighth century stone inscriptions from the central island of Java, which shows that kings levied taxes in rice. Images of rice cultivation, rice barns, and pest mice infesting a ricefield are included in the Karmawibhanga bas-reliefs of Borobudur. Divisions of labour between men, women, and animals that are still in place in Indonesian rice cultivation were carved into relief friezes on the ninth century Prambanan temples in Central Java: a water buffalo attached to a plough; women planting seedlings and pounding grain; and a man carrying sheaves of rice on each end of a pole across his shoulders (pikulan). In the sixteenth century, Europeans visiting the Indonesian islands saw rice as a new prestige food served to the aristocracy during ceremonies and feasts.
Rice production in Indonesian history is linked to the development of iron tools and the domestication of wild Asian water buffalo as water buffalo for cultivation of fields and manure for fertiliser. Rice production requires exposure to the sun. Once covered in dense forest, much of the Indonesian landscape has been gradually cleared for permanent fields and settlements as rice cultivation developed over the last fifteen hundred years.

Wheat
Wheat is not a native plant to Indonesia. Through imports and foreign influences — most notably Chinese and Dutch — Indonesians acquired a taste for wheat-based foodstuffs, especially Chinese noodles, Indian roti, and Dutch bread. Other than common steamed rice, the Chinese in Indonesia also considered noodles, bakpao and cakwe as staples. Yet in Indonesia, especially in Java and Sumatra, the rice culture was so prevalent that sometimes these wheat-based dishes, such as noodles are treated as side dishes and are consumed with rice, while others such as Chinese buns and cakwe are treated as snacks. Europeans, especially the Portuguese and the Dutch, introduced bread and various types of baked goods and pastry. These European staples have now become alternatives for a quick breakfast.
Indonesian wheat consumption reached a new height after the advent of the Indonesian instant noodle industry in the 1970s. Since then, Indonesia has become one of the world's major producers and consumers of instant noodles. Indonesia is the world's second largest instant noodle market only after China, with demand reaching 12.54 billion servings in 2018. Today, instant noodles have become a staple in Indonesian households for quick hot meals. Certain brands such as Indomie have become household names.

Other staples
Other staple foods in Indonesia include a number of starchy tubers such as yam, sweet potato, potato, taro and cassava. Starchy fruit such as breadfruit and jackfruit and grains such as maize are eaten. A sago congee called papeda is a staple food especially in Maluku and Papua. Sago is often mixed with water and cooked as a simple pancake. Next to sago, people of eastern Indonesia consume wild tubers as staple food.
Many types of tubers such as talas (a type of taro but larger and more bland) and breadfruit are native to Indonesia, while others were introduced from elsewhere. Yam was introduced from Africa; while potato, sweet potato, cassava and maize were introduced from the Americas through Spanish influence and reached Java in the 17th century. Cassava is usually boiled, steamed, fried or processed as a popular snack kripik singkong (cassava crackers). Dried cassava, locally known as tiwul, is an alternate staple food in arid areas of Java such as Gunung Kidul and Wonogiri, while other roots and tubers are eaten especially in hard times. Maize is eaten in drier regions such as Madura and islands east of the Wallace Line, such as the Lesser Sunda Islands.

Vegetables
A number of leaf vegetables are widely used in Indonesian cuisine, such as kangkung, spinach, genjer, melinjo, papaya and cassava leaves. These are often sauteed with garlic. Spinach and corn are used in clear, watery vegetable soups like sayur bayam bening, flavoured with temu kunci, garlic and shallot. Clear vegetable soup includes sayur oyong. Other vegetables, like calabash, chayote, kelor, yardlong bean, eggplant, gambas and belustru, are cut and used in stir-fries, curries and soups like sayur asem, sayur lodeh or laksa. Daun ubi tumbuk is a pounded cassava leaves dish, found in Sumatra, Kalimantan and Sulawesi. Sayur sop is cabbage, cauliflower, potato, carrot, with macaroni spiced with black pepper, garlic and shallot in chicken or beef broth. Similar mixed vegetables are also stir-fried as cap cai, a popular dish of the Chinese Indonesian cuisine. Tumis kangkung is a popular stir-fried water spinach dish.
Vegetables like winged bean, tomato, cucumber and small bitter melon are commonly eaten raw, like in lalab. The large bitter melon variety is usually boiled. Kecombrang and papaya flower buds are a common Indonesian vegetable. Urap is seasoned and spiced shredded coconut mixed together with vegetables. Asinan betawi are preserved vegetables. Gado-gado and pecel are a salad of boiled vegetables dressed in a peanut-based spicy sauce, while karedok is its raw version.

Vegetarianism in Indonesia
Vegetarianism is well represented in Indonesia, as a wide selection of vegetarian dishes and meat substitutes are served. According to a Euromonitor International survey conducted in 2018, Indonesia has the third-highest rate of vegetarianism growth. Dishes such as gado-gado, karedok, ketoprak, tauge goreng, pecel, urap, rujak and asinan are vegetarian dishes. However, dishes that use peanut sauce, such as gado-gado, karedok or ketoprak, might contain small amounts of shrimp paste, called "terasi". Shrimp paste is also often used to add flavour to spicy sambal chili paste served with lalap, assorted fresh vegetables. Fermented soy products, such as tempeh, "tahu" (tofu) and oncom are prevalent as meat substitutes and as a source of vegetable protein. In contemporary fusion cuisine, tempeh is used to replace meat patties and served as tempeh burgers.
Most Indonesians do not practice strict vegetarianism and may consume vegetables or vegetarian dishes for their taste, preference, economic and health reasons. Small numbers of Indonesian Buddhists practice vegetarianism for religious reasons.

Meat and fish
The main animal protein sources in the Indonesian diet are poultry and fish, while meats such as beef, water buffalo, goat and mutton are also commonly found in the Indonesian marketplaces.

Poultry
The most common poultry consumed is chicken, followed by duck. Pigeon, quail and wild swamp birds such as watercock are also consumed. Traditionally, Indonesians breed free-range chickens in the villages known as ayam kampung (village chicken). Compared to common mass-farmed chickens, these village chickens are thinner and their meat is slightly firmer.
Various recipes of ayam goreng (fried chicken) and ayam bakar (grilled chicken) are commonly found throughout Indonesia. Other than frying or grilling, chicken might be cooked as soup, such as sup ayam or soto ayam, or cooked in coconut milk as opor ayam. Chicken satay is also commonly found in Indonesia; it is barbecued on skewers and served with peanut sauce. Popular chicken recipes include ayam goreng kalasan from Yogyakarta, ayam bakar padang from Padang, ayam taliwang from Lombok, ayam betutu from Bali, and ayam goreng lengkuas (galangal fried chicken).

Meat
Beef and goat meat are the most commonly consumed meats in Indonesia, while kerbau (water buffalo) and domestic sheep are also consumed to a lesser degree, since water buffalo are more useful for ploughing the rice paddies, while sheep are kept for their wool or to be used for the traditional entertainment of ram fighting. As a country with an Islamic majority, Indonesian Muslims follow the Islamic halal dietary law which forbids the consumption of pork.
In other parts of Indonesia where there are significant numbers of non-Muslims, boar and pork are commonly consumed. Dishes made of non-halal meats can be found in provinces such as Bali, North Sumatra, North Sulawesi, East Nusa Tenggara, Maluku, West Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan, North Kalimantan, West Papua, Papua, and also in the Chinatowns of major Indonesian cities. Today to cater for the larger Muslim market, most of the restaurants and eating establishments in Indonesia put halal signs that signify that they serve neither pork nor any non-halal meats, nor do they use lard in their cooking. With a large Muslim population and a relatively small number of cattle, today Indonesians rely heavily on imported beef from Australia, New Zealand, India and the United States which often results in a scarcity and raised prices of beef in the Indonesian market.
The meat can be cooked in rich spices and coconut milk such as beef, goat or lamb rendang, skewered, seasoned and grilled chicken or mutton as satay, barbecued meats, or sliced and cooked in rich broth soup as soto. Muttons and various offals can be use as ingredients for soto soup or gulai curry. In Bali, with its Hindu majority, the babi guling (pig roast) is popular among locals as well as non-Muslim visitors, while the Batak people of North Sumatra have babi panggang that is a similar dish. Wild boar are also commonly consumed in Papua. The meat also can be processed to be thinly sliced and dried as dendeng (jerky), or made into abon (meat floss). Dendeng celeng is Indonesian "dried, jerked" boar meat. Raised rabbits are also consumed as food in mountainous region of Indonesia.
Some game meat such as venison might be sold and consumed in some areas of Indonesia. In Kalimantan, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, and Papua, deer meat can be found, usually wildly acquired by hunting. Other unusual and often controversial exotic meats include frog legs and softshell turtle consumed in Chinese Indonesian and Javanese cuisine, horse meat consumed in Yogyakarta, West Nusa Tenggara, and South Sulawesi, turtle meat consumed in Bali and Eastern Indonesia, snake, biawak (monitor lizard), paniki (fruit bats), dog meat, cat meat, and field rats consumed in Minahasan cuisine of North Sulawesi. Batak cuisine of North Sumatra is also familiar with cooking dog meat, while its consumption is diminishing in Central Java. Exotic and rare game meat such as crocodile, squirrel, civet, and monkey might also be sold and consumed in wilder parts of Indonesia.

Fish
In an archipelagic nation, seafood is abundant, and it is commonly consumed especially by Indonesian residents in coastal areas. Fish is especially popular in the eastern Indonesian regions of Sulawesi and Maluku, where most of the people work as fishermen. Both areas have a vast sea which brings them many different kinds of seafood.
Popular seafood in Indonesian cuisine includes skipjack tuna, tuna, mackerel, pomfret, wahoo, milkfish, trevally, rabbitfish, abalistes stellatus, amberjacks, rastrelliger, yellowtail scad, nemipterus japonicus, garoupa, red snapper, anchovy, swordfish, shark, stingray, squid or cuttlefish, octopus, shrimp, crab, blue crab, blood clam, razor clam and mussel.
Seafood is commonly consumed across Indonesia, but it is especially popular in Maluku islands, Gorontalo Peninsula and Minahasa (North Sulawesi) cuisine. Seafood is usually grilled, boiled or fried. Ikan bakar is a popular grilled fish dish that can be found throughout Indonesia. The method of cooking like stir fried in spices or in soup is also possible. Salted fish is preserved seafood through cured in salt, it also can be found in Indonesian market.
Fresh water fisheries can be found in inland regions or in areas with large rivers or lakes. Fresh water fishes are popular in Sundanese cuisine of West Java, caught or raised in Lake Toba in Batak lands of North Sumatra, or taken from large rivers in Malay lands of Riau, Jambi and South Sumatra, or large rivers in Kalimantan. Popular fresh water fish among others; carp, gourami, catfish, pangasius (especially the iridescent shark), snakehead, trichogaster, climbing gourami, Nile tilapia, and Mozambique tilapia. Freshwater snails such as pila ampullacea, is also consumed in the country, either by boiling or grilling it's meat as a satay.

Insects
Unlike Thailand, in Indonesia insect is not a popular food ingredient nor widely available as street food. In Java, locals do catch, breed and sell certain species of insects, usually sold fresh or alive as pet bird feed. Nevertheless, traditionally several cultures in Indonesia are known to consume insects, especially grasshopper, cricket, termite, also the larvae of sago palm weevil, bee and dragonfly. In Java and Kalimantan, grasshoppers and crickets are usually lightly battered and deep fried in palm oil as crispy kripik snack. Smaller grasshoppers, crickets and termites might be made as rempeyek batter cracker which resembles insect fossil. During monsoon rainy season, flying termites are abundant being attracted to lightbulbs to mate. Locals usually put a bucket of water under the lamp to trap the flying termites, pluck the wings, and roast the termites as additional protein-rich snack. In Banyuwangi, East Java, there is a specialty dish called botok tawon (honeybee botok), which is beehives that contains bee larvae, being seasoned in shredded coconut and spices, wrapped inside banana leaf package and steamed. Dayak tribes of Kalimantan, also Moluccans and Papuan tribes in Eastern Indonesia, are known to consumes ulat sagu (lit. sagoo caterpillar) or larvae of sago palm weevil. This protein-rich larvae are considered a delicacy in Papua, and often being roasted prior of consumption. Locals may also commonly eat the larvae raw or alive. In Bali, dragonflies are also consumed by processing them into pepes.

Spices and other flavourings
"Rempah" is the Indonesian word for spice, while "bumbu" is the Indonesian word for a spice mixture or seasoning, and it commonly appears in the names of certain spice mixtures, sauces and seasoning pastes.
Known throughout the world as the "Spice Islands", the Indonesian islands of Maluku contributed to the introduction of its native spices to world cuisine. Spices such as nutmeg or mace, clove, pandan leaves, keluwak and galangal are native to Indonesia. It is likely that black pepper, turmeric, lemongrass, shallot, cinnamon, candlenut, coriander and tamarind were introduced from India, while ginger, scallions and garlic were introduced from China. Those spices from mainland Asia were introduced early, in ancient times, thus they became integral ingredients in Indonesian cuisine.
In ancient times, the kingdom of Sunda and the later sultanate of Banten were well known as the world's major producers of black pepper. The maritime empires of Srivijaya and Majapahit also benefited from the lucrative spice trade between the spice islands with China and India. Later the Dutch East India Company controlled the spice trade between Indonesia and the world.

Sambal
The Indonesian fondness for hot and spicy food was enriched when the Spanish introduced chili pepper from the New World to the region in the 16th century. After that hot and spicy sambals have become an important part of Indonesian cuisine.
Indonesia has perhaps the richest variants of sambals. In the Indonesian archipelago, there are as many as 300 varieties of sambal. The intensity ranges from mild to very hot. Sambal evolved into many variants across Indonesia, ones of the most popular is sambal terasi (sambal belacan) and sambal mangga muda (unripe mango sambal). Sambal terasi is a combination of chilies, sharp fermented shrimp paste called terasi, tangy lime juice, sugar and salt all pounded up with mortar and pestle. Dabu-dabu is a combined Gorontalo and North Sulawesi style of sambal with chopped fresh tomato, chili, and lime juice.

Sambal, especially sambal ulek, or sambal terasi can also become a base ingredient for many dishes, such as sambal raja (a dish from Kutai), terong balado, dendeng balado, ayam bumbu rujak, sambal goreng ati, among other things.

Sauces and seasonings
Soy sauce is also an important flavourings in Indonesian cuisine. Kecap asin (salty or common soy sauce) was adopted from Chinese cuisine, however Indonesian developed their own kecap manis (sweet soy sauce) with generous addition of palm sugar into soy sauce. Sweet soy sauce is an important marinade for barbecued meat and fish, such as satay and grilled fishes. Sweet soy sauce is also an important ingredient for semur, Indonesian stew.

Peanut sauce
One of the main characteristics of Indonesian cuisine is the wide application of peanuts in many Indonesian signature dishes, such as satay, gado-gado, karedok, ketoprak, and pecel. All of these dishes applied ample of bumbu kacang (peanut sauce) for flavouring. Gado-gado and satay, for example, have been considered Indonesian national dishes.
Introduced from Mexico by Portuguese and Spanish merchants in the 16th century, peanuts assumed a place within Indonesian cuisine as a key ingredient. Peanuts thrived in the tropical environment of Southeast Asia, and today they can be found, roasted and chopped finely, in many recipes. Whole, halved, or crushed peanuts are used to garnish a variety of dishes, and used in marinades and dipping sauces such as sambal kacang (a mixture of ground chilies and fried peanuts) for otak-otak or ketan. Peanut oil, extracted from peanuts, is one of the most commonly used cooking oils in Indonesia.
Bumbu kacang or peanut sauce represents a sophisticated, earthy seasoning rather than a sweet, gloppy sauce. It should have a delicate balance of savoury, sweet, sour, and spicy flavours, acquired from various ingredients, such as fried peanuts, gula jawa (coconut sugar), garlic, shallots, ginger, tamarind, lemon juice, lemongrass, salt, chilli, peppercorns, sweet soy sauce, ground together and mixed with water to form the right consistency. The secret to good peanut sauce is "not too thick and not too watery". Indonesian peanut sauce tends to be less sweet than the Thai version, which is a hybrid adaptation. Gado-gado is a popular dish particularly associated with bumbu kacang, and is eaten across Indonesia.

Coconut milk
Coconuts are abundant in tropical Indonesia, and since ancient times Indonesians developed many and various uses for this plant. The broad use of coconut milk in dishes throughout the archipelago is another common characteristic of Indonesian cuisine. It is used in recipes ranging from savoury dishes – such as rendang, soto, gulai, mie koclok, sayur lodeh, gudeg, and opor ayam – to desserts – such as es cendol and es doger.
The use of coconut milk is not exclusive to Indonesian cuisine. It can also be found in Indian, Samoan, Thai, Malaysian, Filipino, and Brazilian cuisines. Nonetheless, the use of coconut milk is quite extensive in Indonesia, especially in Minangkabau cuisine and Gorontalese cuisine, although in Minahasan (North Sulawesi) cuisine, coconut milk is generally absent, except in Minahasan cakes and desserts such as klappertaart.

In Indonesian cuisine, two types of coconut milk are found, thin coconut milk and thick coconut milk. The difference depends on the water and oil content. Thin coconut milk is usually used for soups such as sayur lodeh and soto, while the thicker variety is used for rendang and desserts. It can be made from freshly shredded coconut meat in traditional markets, or can be found processed in cartons at the supermarket.
After the milk has been extracted from the shredded coconut flesh to make coconut milk, the ampas kelapa (leftover coconut flesh) can still be used in urap, seasoned and spiced shredded coconut meat mixed together with vegetables. Leftover shredded coconut can also be cooked, sauteed and seasoned to make serundeng, almost powdery sweet and spicy finely shredded coconut. Kerisik paste, added to thicken rendang, is another use of coconut flesh. To acquire a rich taste, some households insist on using freshly shredded coconut, instead of leftover, for urap and serundeng. Serundeng can be mixed with meat in dishes such as serundeng daging (beef serundeng) or sprinkled on top of other dishes such as soto or ketan (sticky rice). An example of the heavy use of coconut is burasa from Makassar, rice wrapped in banana leaf cooked with coconut milk and sprinkled with powdered coconut similar to serundeng.

Cooking method
Most of the common Indonesian dishes are named according to their main ingredients and cooking method. For example, ayam goreng is ayam (chicken) and goreng (frying), which denotes fried chicken. Mie goreng is fried noodle, ikan bakar is grilled fish, udang rebus is boiled shrimp, babi panggang is roasted pork and tumis kangkung is stir fried water spinach. Cooking methods in Indonesian kitchen are goreng (frying) either in a small amount of oil or deep frying with a lot of cooking oil, tumis (stir frying), sangrai (sautéing). Roasting methods are bakar (grilling) usually employing charcoal, firewood, or coconut shell, panggang (baking/roasting) usually refer to baking employing oven. Other methods are rebus (boiling), kukus (steaming) and asap/salai (smoking).
The fire used in cooking can be either a strong fire or a small fire for slow cooking. Cooking nasi goreng usually employs strong fire, while authentic rendang for example requires a small fire for slow cooking of beef, spices, and coconut milk until the meat is caramelised and all the coconut milk's liquid has evaporated. Traditional Indonesian dapur (kitchen) usually employs firewood-fuelled kitchen stove, while the contemporary household today uses liquefied petroleum gas-fuelled stove or an electric stove. The ingredients could be cut into pieces, sliced thinly, or ground into a paste. Cooking utensils are wajan (wok), penggorengan (frying pan), panci (cauldron), knives, several types of spoon and fork, parutan (shredder), cobek and ulekan (stone mortar and pestle). Traditionally Indonesians use a stone mortar and a pestle to grind the spices and ingredients into coarse or fine pastes. Today most households use blender or food processor for the task. Traditional Indonesian cooking wares are usually made from stone, earthenware pottery, wood, and woven bamboo or a rattan container or filter, while contemporary cooking wares, plates and containers use metals – iron, tin, stainless steel, aluminium, ceramics, plastics, and also glass.

National dishes
Initially during the early years of Indonesian independence, the ubiquitous and highly popular nasi goreng was considered the national dish of the republic, albeit at that time was unofficial. Its simplicity and versatility has contributed to its popularity and made it as a staple among Indonesian households—colloquially considered the most "democratic" dish since the absence of an exact and rigid recipe has allowed people to do anything they want with it.
Nasi goreng that is commonly consumed daily in Indonesian households was considered the quintessential dish that represent an Indonesian family. It is in the menu, introduced, offered and served in Indonesian Theatre Restaurant within the Indonesian pavilion at the 1964 New York World's Fair. Howard Palfrey Jones, the US ambassador to Indonesia during the last years of Sukarno's reign in the mid 1960s, in his memoir "Indonesia: The Possible Dream", said that he likes nasi goreng. He described his fondness for nasi goreng cooked by Hartini, one of Sukarno's wives, and praised it as the most delicious nasi goreng he ever tasted. Nevertheless, other widely popular Indonesian dishes, such as satay, soto and gado-gado are also considered strong contenders. Soto is ubiquitous in Indonesia and considered one of Indonesia's national dishes.
In 2014, the Indonesian Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy in an effort to promote Indonesian cuisine, has chosen tumpeng as an official Indonesian national dish. Technically tumpeng refer to the rice cone in the center, while the surrounding various dishes might be taken from any choice of various Indonesian dishes—thus was considered ideal as a national dish that binds the diversity of Indonesia's various culinary traditions. Subsequently the designation of tumpeng as the single national dish of Indonesia was considered insufficient to describe the diversity of Indonesian culinary traditions. Later in 2018, the same ministry has chosen another additional 5 national dishes of Indonesia; they are soto, satay, nasi goreng, rendang and gado-gado.
Satay and soto are notable and the natural choice to be promoted as Indonesian national dish, since they had transcends the cultural boundaries of myriad ethnic groups of Indonesia—those dishes has been extremely localised and has branched into various recipes nationwide. For example, there are rich variants of satay and soto recipes throughout Indonesia; from Sumatra to Eastern Indonesia. Each cultures, ethnics, or even cities had adopted these dishes, and thus developed their own version in accordance to their own culture, tradition, creativity, localised taste and preference, also the availability of local ingredients.

Regional dishes
Jakarta
Diverse and eclectic, Betawi cuisine of Jakarta draw culinary influences from Chinese, Malay, Sundanese, to Arab, Indian and European. Popular Betawi dishes include nasi uduk (coconut rice), sayur asem (sweet and sour vegetable soup), asinan (salad of pickled vegetables), gado-gado, (boiled or blanched vegetables salad in peanut sauce), ketoprak, (vegetables, tofu, rice vermicelli and rice cake in peanut sauce), and kerak telor (spiced coconut omelette). Born from a creole or hybrid phenomena, the Betawi cuisine is quite similar to the Peranakan cuisine.

West Java
A textural speciality of Sunda (West Java) is karedok, a fresh salad made with long beans, bean sprouts, and cucumber with a spicy peanut sauce. Lalab fresh vegetables served with spicy sambal dipping sauce is ubiquitous in Sundanese households and eating establishments. Other Sundanese dishes include mie kocok which is a beef and egg noodle soup, and soto bandung, a beef and vegetable soup with daikon and lemongrass. A hawker favourite is kupat tahu (pressed rice, bean sprouts, and tofu with soy and peanut sauce). Colenak (roasted fermented cassava tapai with sweet coconut sauce) and ulen (roasted brick of sticky rice with peanut sauce) are dishes usually eaten warm.

Central Java
The food of Central Java is renowned for its sweetness, and the dish of gudeg, a curry made from jackfruit, is particularly sweet. The city of Yogyakarta is renowned for its ayam goreng (fried chicken) and klepon (green rice-flour balls with palm sugar filling). Surakarta's (Solo) specialities include nasi liwet (rice with coconut milk, unripe papaya, garlic and shallots, served with chicken or egg) and serabi (coconut milk pancakes topped with chocolate, banana or jackfruit). Other Central Javanese specialities include pecel (peanut sauce with spinach and bean sprouts), lotek (peanut sauce with vegetable and pressed rice), and opor ayam (braised chicken in coconut sauce).

East Java
The food of East Java is similar to that of Central Java. East Java foods tend to be less sweet and more spicier compare to the Central Javanese ones. Fish and fish/seafood products are used quite extensively, e.g. terasi (dried shrimp paste) and petis udang (shrimp paste). Some of the more popular foods are lontong kupang (tiny clams soup with rice cakes), lontong balap (bean sprouts and tofu with rice cakes), sate klopo (coconut beef satay), semanggi surabaya (marsilea leaves with spicy sweet potato sauce), pecel lele (deep fried catfish served with rice and sambal), rawon (dark beef soup). Food from Malang includes bakso malang (meatball soup with won ton and noodles) and orem-orem (pressed rice, tempe, sprouts, soy sauce, coconut, and peanuts).

Madura
Madura is an island on the northeastern coast of Java and is administered as part of the East Java province. Like the Eastern Javanese foods which use petis udang, Madura foods add petis ikan which is made from fish instead of shrimp. The Madura style satay is probably the most popular satay variants in Indonesia. Some of its popular dishes are sate ayam Madura (chicken satay with peanut sauce), soto Madura (beef soup). There is also a mutton variant of Madura satay, Madura goat satay. Sup Kambing mutton soup is also popular in Madura. As a leading salt production center in Indonesian archipelago, Madura dishes are often saltier compared to other Eastern Javanese foods.

Bali
Balinese cuisine dishes include lawar (chopped coconut, garlic, chilli, with pork or chicken meat and blood). Bebek betutu is duck stuffed with spices, wrapped in banana leaves and coconut husks cooked in a pit of embers. Balinese sate, known as sate lilit, is made from spiced mince pressed onto skewers which are often made from lemon grass sticks. Babi guling is a spit-roasted pig stuffed with chilli, turmeric, garlic, and ginger.
Basa gede or basa rajang is a spice paste that is a basic ingredient in many Balinese dishes.

Batak
Batak people use either pork or even dog to make saksang. Another Batak pork speciality is babi panggang in which the meat is boiled in vinegar and pig blood before being roasted. Another batak dish, ayam namargota, is chicken cooked in spices and blood. Another notable Batak dish is arsik, the carp fish cooked with spices and herbs. Within Batak cuisine, andaliman (Zanthoxylum acanthopodium) is often used as a spice.

Aceh
Arab, Persian, and Indian traders influenced food in Aceh although flavours have changed a lot their original forms. Amongst these are curry dishes known as kare or gulai, which are rich, coconut-based dishes traditionally made with beef, goat, fish or poultry, but are now also made with tofu, vegetables, and jackfruit. The popular Aceh food such as roti cane, mie aceh and nasi gurih.

West Sumatra
Buffaloes are a symbol of West Sumatra and are used in rendang, a rich and spicy buffalo meat or beef dish, which is also the signature dish of Minangkabau culture. In 2017, rendang was chosen as the "World's Most Delicious Food" by the CNN Travel reader's choice. Padang food comes from West Sumatra, and they have perhaps the richest variants of gulai, a type of curried meat, offal, fish or vegetables. Padang favourite includes asam padeh (sour and spicy fish stew), sate Padang (Padang satay), soto Padang (Padang soto) and katupek sayua (ketupat rice dumpling in vegetable soup). Dishes from the region include nasi kapau from Bukittinggi, which is similar to Padang food but uses more vegetables. Ampiang dadiah (buffalo yogurt with palm sugar syrup, coconut flesh and rice) and bubur kampiun (Mung bean porridge with banana and rice yogurt) are other West Sumatran specialties.
Traditionally, Minangkabau people adheres to merantau (migrating) culture, and they are avid restaurant entrepreneurs. As a result, Padang food restaurant chains can be found throughout Indonesia and neighbouring countries, likely making it the most popular regional dish in Indonesia. Outside of West Sumatra, such as in Java, most Padang Restaurants still use buffalo to make rendang, but claim it is Rendang Sapi for selling purposes, due to buffalo meat being "inferior" and cheaper than cow meat. Buffalo meat is harder, so it is more suitable for rendang which has a cooking time of at least 3 hours, and presents a coarser texture and a redder color compared to cow meat when it is fully cooked.

East Sumatra
The cuisine of east coast of Sumatra is referring to the culinary tradition of ethnic Malays of Indonesian Sumatran provinces facing Malacca strait; which includes Riau, Riau Islands, Jambi provinces and coastal North Sumatra in Melayu Deli areas in and around Medan. Because of close ethnic kinship and proximity to Malaysian Malays, many dishes are shared between the two countries. For example nasi lemak, the national dish of Malaysia, and also nasi ulam are considered native dishes in Riau and Jambi. Malay cuisine also shares many similarities with neighboring Minangkabau cuisine of West Sumatra, South Sumatra, and also Aceh; such as sharing gulai, asam pedas, pindang, kari, lemang and rendang. This is due to the fact that the Minangkabau are culturally closely related to the Malays. Tempoyak fermented durian sauce and sambal belacan are the familiar condiments in both Sumatra and Malay Peninsula. Variants of peranakan cuisine such as laksa spicy noodle and otak-otak are also can be found in Riau Islands and Medan. Seafood dishes are popular in archipelagic Riau Islands province, while fresh water fishes from Sumatran rivers, such as patin, catfish, carp and gourami are popular in Riau and Jambi. Gulai ikan patin is a signature dish of Pekanbaru, while gulai ketam (crab gulai) and nasi goreng teri Medan (Medan anchovy fried rice) are the signature dishes of Medan.

South Sumatra
The city of Palembang is the culinary centre of South Sumatra and is renowned for its pempek, a deep fried fish and sago dumpling that is also known as empek-empek. Pempek is served in distinctive kuah cuko, a sweet, sour and spicy sauce made from palm sugar, chili, tamarind and vinegar. Pempek derivatives dishes are tekwan soup of pempek dumpling, mushroom, vegetables, and shrimp, lenggang or pempek slices in omelette. Mie celor is a noodle dish with egg in coconut milk and dried shrimp, it is a Palembang speciality.
The cuisine of Palembang demonstrates various influences, from native Palembang Malay taste to Chinese and Javanese influences. Pempek is said to be influenced by Chinese fish cake akin to surimi, while the preference of mild sweetness is said to be of Javanese influence. South Sumatra is home to pindang, a sweet, sour and spicy fish soup made from soy sauce and tamarind. Pindang dishes usually uses either freshwater fishes and seafood as ingredients. Ikan brengkes is fish in a spicy durian-based sauce. Tempoyak is a sauce of shrimp paste, lime juice, chilli and fermented durian, and sambal buah is a chilli sauce made from fruit.

North Sulawesi
Manado cuisine of Minahasan people from North Sulawesi features the heavy use of meat such as pork, fowl, and seafood. Woku is a type of seafood dish with generous use of spices, often making up half the dish. The ingredients include lemongrass, lime leaves, chili peppers, spring onion, shallots, either sautéed with meat or wrapped around fish and grilled covered in banana leaves. Other ingredients such as turmeric and ginger are often added to create a version of woku. Other Minahasan signature dishes are tinutuan, chicken tuturuga, rica-rica and cakalang fufu.
Foreign colonial influence played a role in shaping Minahasan cuisine. Several cakes and pastries explicitly show Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish influences such as klappertaart and panada. Brenebon (from Dutch bruin (brown) and boon (bean)) is a pork shank bean stew spiced with nutmeg and clove. Minahasan roast pork similar to lechon in the Philippines or pig roast in Hawaii are served in special occasions, especially weddings. Other unusual and exotic meats such as dog, bat, and forest rat are regularly served in North Sulawesi region. Paniki is the bat dish of Minahasa.

Gorontalo
The strategic location of Gorontalo, between the Celebes Sea and Pacific Ocean in the north, and also Gulf of Tomini in the south, has made the Gorontalo region a strategic shipping route in the past. This long past history has formed the roots of a unique and distinctive culture in Gorontalo, including its unique dishes. Therefore, Gorontalo is also known as the land of spices with a unique taste of culinary.
Gorontalese cuisine known for its fresh seafood, prepared using a full-palette of spices and herbs. Home of some Gorontalese delicacies such as binte biluhuta, ayam iloni, ikan iloni, sate tuna, tabu moitomo, sate balanga, sagela, pilitode, and bilentango.
Gorontalo cuisine is also marked by a multi-cultural influence from other communities who migrated to Gorontalo, such as Arabs and Chinese culture. Moreover, Gorontalo's pastries are also famous for their sweetness and it has been influenced by European culture brought by the Dutch.
In 2016, the Gorontalese recipe book: "Trailing the Taste of Gorontalo" won as the "Best in the World" at the Gourmand World Cookbook Award in Yantai, China for the Asian Cuisine from Asian Books category.

South Sulawesi
Makassar is one of the culinary centres in Indonesia. Home of some Bugis and Makassar delicacies such as Coto, Konro, Pallubasa and Mie Kering. All of these Makassar foods are usually consumed with burasa, a coconut milk rice dumpling wrapped in a banana leaf, to replace steamed rice or ketupat. As a big fish market centre, Makassar is also famous for its seafood. Various ikan bakar or grilled fish are popular and commonly served in Makassar restaurants, warung and foodstalls, such as ikan bolu bakar (grilled milkfish). Sop saudara from Pangkep and Kapurung from Palopo are also famous dishes of South Sulawesi. Another popular cuisine from Makassar is Ayam Goreng Sulawesi (Celebes fried chicken); the chicken is marinated in a traditional soy sauce for up to 24 hours before being fried into a golden colour. The dish is usually served with chicken broth, rice and special sambal (chilli sauce).
In addition, Makassar is also home of traditional sweet snacks such as pisang epe (pressed banana), as well as pisang ijo (green banana). Pisang Epe is a flat-grilled banana which is pressed, grilled, and covered with palm sugar sauce and sometimes eaten with durian. Many street vendors sell pisang epe, especially around the area of Losari beach. Pisang ijo is a banana covered with green colored flours, coconut milk, and syrup. Pisang ijo is sometimes served iced, and often sold and consumed as iftar to break the fast during Ramadhan.

Nusa Tenggara
With a drier climate in Nusa Tenggara archipelago, there is less rice and more sago, corn, cassava, and taro compared to central and western Indonesia. Fishes are popularly consumed, including sepat (Trichogaster), which is shredded fish in coconut and young-mango sauce. Lombok's sasak people enjoy spicy food such as ayam taliwang which is roasted chicken served with peanut, tomato chilli and lime dip. Pelecing is a spicy sauce used in many dishes made with chilli, shrimp paste, and tomato. A local shrimp paste called lengkare is used on the island of Lombok. Sares is made from chilli, coconut juice and banana palm pith and is sometimes mixed with meat. Non meat dishes include kelor (hot soup with vegetables), serebuk (vegetables mixed with coconut), and timun urap (cucumber with coconut, onion and garlic).
In East Nusa Tenggara, majority of its inhabitants are Catholics, hence pork is commonly consumed. Popular Timor dishes are Se'i smoked meat (usually pork), and katemak vegetable soup.
The villages of Lamalera and Lamakera have a unique dietary in which they hunt and eat whales. Although they also catch dolphins and manta rays, they prefer to hunt whales as a whale can feed the whole village for weeks. Usually they hunt Sperm whale and Orca, while some whales such as the Baleen whale is considered to be taboo to hunt.

Maluku and Papua
The Maluku Islands' cuisine is rich with seafood, while the native Papuan food usually consists of roasted boar with tubers such as sweet potato and taro. Various types of ikan bakar (grilled fish) or seafood are eaten with spicy colo-colo condiment. The staple food of Maluku and Papua is sago, either as a pancake or sago congee called papeda, usually eaten with yellow soup made from tuna, red snapper or other fishes spiced with turmeric, lime, and other spices.

Foreign influences
Indian influences
Indian influence can be observed in Indonesia as early as the 4th century. Following the spread of Islam to Indonesia, Muslim Indian as well as Arab influences made their way into Indonesian cuisine. Andreas Maryoto, a journalist which focus on culinary history, suggests there was at least two waves of Indian culinary influence that made its way into Indonesia. The early arrival was marked by the adoption of Hindu culture that still can be seen in Java. The second wave came from the Mughal Empire, which was influenced by Islamic culture that has entered the archipelago. This second wave of Indian culinary influence can be seen throughout most of northern Sumatra, especially in Aceh and West Sumatra provinces. Examples include Indian martabak and kari (curry) that influenced the cuisines of the Acehnese, Minangkabau and the Malays of Sumatra; in addition to Betawi and coastal Javanese cuisine. Some of Acehnese and Minangkabau dishes such as roti cane, nasi biryani, roti jala, mie aceh and gulai kambing can trace its origin to Indian influences.

Arab influences
Arab Indonesians brought their legacy of Arab cuisine—originally from Hadhramaut, Hejaz and Egypt—and modified some of the dishes with the addition of Indonesian ingredients. The Arabs arrived in the Nusantara archipelago to trade and spread Islam. Nasi kebuli for example, is a popular dish among Arab Indonesian community that has made its way into mainstream Indonesian cuisine. In Maluku, kue asida served during Ramadan for iftar, is believed to be derived from the Middle Eastern asida that was introduced by Arab merchants into the Maluku Islands.

Chinese influences
Chinese immigration to Indonesia started in the 7th century, and accelerated during Dutch colonial times, thus creating the fusion of Chinese cuisine with indigenous Indonesian style. Similar Chinese-native fusion cuisine phenomena is also observable in neighbouring Malaysia and Singapore as peranakan cuisine.
Most of the Chinese influence on Indonesian cuisine hails from the Hokkien style of cooking, with other influences coming from Hakka, Teochew and Cantonese style of cooking. Some of Chinese Indonesian food retain its Hokkien name; e.g. kwetiau, bakmi, bakcang, bihun and lumpia. Some popular Indonesian dishes trace its origin to Chinese influences such as; bakso, soto mie, soto, bakpau, nasi goreng, mie goreng, tahu goreng, siomay, pempek, nasi tim, cap cai, fu yung hai and swikee. Some of this Chinese-influenced dishes has been so well-integrated into Indonesian mainstream cuisine that many Indonesian today might not recognise their Chinese-origin and considered them their own.

European influences
The Dutch and The Portuguese arrived in Indonesia in the 15th and the 16th century respectively in search of spices. The two colonial powers went for a century of struggle for the dominance over the archipelago, with the Dutch coming as victorious. When the Dutch East India Company (VOC) went bankrupt in 1800, Indonesia became a treasured colony of the Netherlands. Through colonialism, Europeans introduced bread, cheese, barbecued steak and pancake. Bread, butter and margarine, chocolate sprinkles, sandwiches filled with ham, cheese or fruit jam, poffertjes, pannenkoek and Dutch cheeses are commonly consumed by colonial Dutch and Indos during the colonial era. Some of native upperclass ningrat (nobles and economically well-off), and educated natives were exposed to European cuisine; This cuisine was held in high esteem as the cuisine of the upper class of Dutch East Indies society.
This led to adoption and fusion of European cuisine into Indonesian cuisine. Several Indonesian food can trace its origin from Dutch influence, such as kue odading that was derived from Dutch oliebollen, semur from Dutch smoor, perkedel from frikadeller,  sop senerek from erwtensoep, selat solo (solo salad) from holland biefstuk.

Some dishes created during the colonial era were influenced by Dutch cuisine, including roti bakar (grilled bread), roti buaya, macaroni schotel (macaroni casserole), pastel tutup (Shepherd's pie), bistik jawa (Javanese beef steak), erten (pea soup), brenebon (kidney bean soup) and sop buntut.
Many pastries, cakes and cookies such as kue bolu (tart), lapis legit (spekkoek), lapis Surabaya (spiku), kroket (croquette), kue bolu kenari (ontbijtkoek), and kastengel (kaasstengels or cheese sticks) are come from Dutch influence. Some recipes were invented as Dutch Indies fusion cuisine, using native ingredients but employing European pastry techniques. These include pandan cake and klappertaart (coconut tart). Kue cubit, commonly sold as a snack at schools and marketplaces, are believed to be derived from poffertjes.
To a lesser extent, the Portuguese have also left their mark on Indonesian cuisine, in particular the Eastern part of the country's cooking, Panada for one, is believed to be an Indonesian interpretation of the Portuguese Empanadas, while Kue pastel is also another example of an interpretation of Portuguese pastry cooking by the Indonesians, Pastel de nata is also commonly present in the country, especially in the eastern parts of the country and among the Portuguese descendants in the city of Jakarta.

Influence abroad
Conversely, Indonesian cuisine also had influenced the Dutch through their shared colonial heritage. Indonesian cuisine also influencing neighbouring countries through Indonesians migration across the straits to Malaysia and Singapore.

Malaysia
Because of their proximity, historic migrations and close cultural kinship, Indonesian cuisine also has influenced neighbouring cooking traditions; most notably Malaysian cuisine. Indonesian influence is pervasive in the central state of Negeri Sembilan, which was settled largely by Minangkabau people hailing from West Sumatra and is, thus, reflected in their culture, history and cuisine. Minangkabau cuisine influences is profound in Malay cooking tradition, as the result both traditions share same dishes; including rendang, gulai, asam pedas and tempoyak. Rendang is a typical example that has been well-integrated into mainstream Malaysian cuisine and is now considered their own, and popular especially during Hari Raya Aidil Fitri. In the early 20th century, there are large influx of Sumatrans to Kuala Lumpur and other parts of Malaysia heartland, that led to the popularity of Nasi Padang (originated from Padang city, West Sumatra) not only in Malaysia, but also in Singapore.
The Malay cuisine of southernmost state of Johor, reflects the influences of Javanese who settled there for over past two centuries. Popular Javanese-origin dishes in Johor includes ayam penyet, nasi ambeng, telur pindang, sayur lodeh, mee rebus and pechal.

Singapore
Some dishes in Singapore are influenced by Indonesian cuisine. Satay bee hoon  has a connection to Javanese cuisine. The dish was a product of Teochew Chinese and Javanese culinary cultures. Singaporean rojak has its roots in Indonesia. In cakes and pastries, Indonesian traditional kue snacks and dessert also has influenced Singapore's kueh scene, through the migration of Anastasia Liew, a Chinese Indonesian entrepreneur, into the city state and established Bengawan Solo cake shop that has become a Singaporean signature.

Thailand
To a lesser extent, Indonesian cuisine also had influenced Thai cuisine — probably through Malaysian intermediary — such as the introduction of satay, from Java to Sumatra, Malay Peninsula, and reached Thailand. Achat (Thai: อาจาด pronounced [ʔāː.t͡ɕàːt]), is a Thai pickle which is believed to be derived from Indonesian acar. It is made with cucumber, red chilies, red onions or shallots, vinegar, sugar and salt. It is served as a side dish with the Thai version of satay (Thai: สะเต๊ะ).

Netherlands
During the colonial period, the Dutch embraced Indonesian cuisine both at home and abroad. The Indonesian cuisine had influenced colonial Dutch and Indo people that brought Indonesian dishes back to the Netherlands due to repatriation following the independence of Indonesia.
C. Countess van Limburg Stirum writes in her book "The Art of Dutch Cooking" (1962): There exist countless Indonesian dishes, some of which take hours to prepare; but a few easy ones have become so popular that they can be regarded as "national dishes". She then provides recipes for nasi goreng (fried rice), pisang goreng (battered, deep fried bananas), lumpia goreng (fried spring rolls), bami (fried noodles), satay (grilled skewered meat), satay sauce (peanut sauce), and sambal oelek (chilli paste).
Dutch-Indonesian fusion dishes also exist, of which the most well-known is the rijsttafel ("rice table"), which is an elaborate meal consisting of many (up to several dozens) small dishes (hence filling "an entire table"). While popular in the Netherlands, Rijsttafel is now rare in Indonesia itself. Today, there are many Indonesian restaurants in the Netherlands, especially in large cities like Amsterdam, The Hague, Utrecht and Rotterdam.

Culinary diplomacy
Indonesian cuisine traditionally enjoyed popularity in neighbouring countries; e.g. Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and Australia, as well as nations that shares historical ties with Indonesia; such as the Netherlands, Suriname, East Timor and South Africa. It is also increasingly popular in Japan and Korea, as well as in Western Europe through Dutch intermediary.

Learning from the success of other countries culinary diplomacy, especially those of Thailand, Korea and Japan, in 2021, the Indonesian government has launched the "Indonesia Spice Up The World" program, which is a form of coordinated gastrodiplomacy efforts. The programme was launched to promote Indonesian cuisine abroad, to assist Indonesian culinary industry; by helping the local spice products and processed food to find their ways into the global market, and also to assist Indonesian restaurants abroad.
The "Indonesia Spice Up The World" program involves government's inter-ministerial institutions, Indonesian food industry, and also the public. The objective of the program is to boost the export value of Indonesian spices and herbs to US$2 billion, and increasing the presence of four thousand Indonesian restaurants abroad by 2024.

Meal times
Indonesians might consume snacks or varieties of small dishes throughout the day. If separate scheduled larger meal is observed, they usually consists of sarapan or makan pagi (breakfast), makan siang (lunch) is often the main meal of the day, followed by makan malam (dinner). Mealtime is typically a casual and solitary affair, and might be observed differently across region.
In western and central Indonesia, the main meal is usually cooked in the late morning, and consumed around midday. In many families there is no set meal time when all members are expected to attend. For this reason, most of the dishes are made so that they can remain edible even if left on the table at room temperature for many hours. The same dishes are then re-heated for the final meal in the evening. Most meals are built around a cone-shaped pile of long-grain, highly polished rice. A meal may include a soup, salad (or more commonly vegetables sautéed with garlic), and another main dish. Whatever the meal, it is accompanied by at least one, and often several, relishes called sambals. Especially for Javanese family, on the table, it is also common to always have chips, that can be kerupuk, rempeyek, or any other chips to accompany the meal.
In eastern Indonesia, such as on the islands of Papua and Timor, where the climate is often much drier, the meals can be centred around other sources of carbohydrates such as sago or root vegetables and starchy tubers. Being east of the Wallace line, the biogeographic realm, and hence the flora and fauna, are quite different from those of the islands to the west, and so the food stuffs are as well.

Feasts
Tumpeng
Many Indonesian traditional customs and ceremonies incorporate food and feast, one of the best examples is tumpeng. Originally from Java, tumpeng is a cone shaped mound of rice surrounded by an assortment of other dishes, officially chosen as Indonesian national dish in 2014. Traditionally featured in slametan ceremonies, the cone of rice is made by using bamboo leaves woven into a cone-shaped container. The rice itself can be plain white steamed rice, uduk (rice cooked with coconut milk), or yellow rice (rice coloured with kunyit, i.e., turmeric). After it is shaped, the rice cone is surrounded by assorted dishes, such as urap vegetables, fried chicken, semur (beef in sweet soy sauce), teri kacang (little dried fish fried with peanuts), fried prawns, telur pindang (marbleized boiled eggs), shredded omelette, tempe orek (sweet, dry fried tempeh), perkedel kentang (mashed potato fritters), perkedel jagung (corn fritters), sambal goreng ati (liver in chilli sauce), and many other dishes. Nasi tumpeng probably comes from an ancient Indonesian tradition that revers mountains as the abode of the ancestors and the gods. Rice cone is meant to symbolise the holy mountain. The feast served as some kind of thanksgiving for the abundance of harvest or any other blessings. Because of its festivities and celebratory value, even now tumpeng is sometimes used as an Indonesian counterpart to birthday cake.

Nasi Padang
Having Nasi Padang in festive hidang (serve) style provides opportunity to sample wide array of Padang food in a single setting. Nasi Padang (Padang-style rice) is the steamed rice served with various choices of pre-cooked dishes originated from Padang city, West Sumatra. It is a miniature banquet of meats, fish, vegetables, and spicy sambals eaten with plain white rice. It is the Minangkabau's great contribution to Indonesian cuisine.
After the customers are seated, they do not have to order. The waiter with stacked plates upon their hands will immediately serves the dishes directly to the table. The table will quickly be set with dozens of small dishes filled with richly flavoured foods such as beef rendang, various gulais, curried fish, stewed greens, chili eggplant, curried beef liver, tripe, intestines, or foot tendons, fried beef lung, fried chicken, and of course, sambal. A dozen of dishes is a normal number, it could reach 14 dishes or more. Nasi Padang is an at-your-table, by-the-plate buffet. Customers take — and pay for — only what they have consumed from this array.

Rijsttafel
Another Indonesian feast, the Rijsttafel (from Dutch, meaning 'rice table'), demonstrates both colonial opulence and the diversity of Indonesian cuisine at the same time. The classic style rijsttafel involved serving of up to 40 different dishes by 40 male waiters, bare foot but dressed in formal white uniforms with blangkon (traditional Javanese caps) on their heads and batik cloth around their waists. In contemporary Indonesian cuisine, it has been adapted into a western style prasmanan buffet.

Prasmanan
When attending the reception of an Indonesian traditional wedding party, office lunch-time meeting, a seminar or dinner gathering, one usually will find themselves queuing to Indonesian prasmanan; a long table filled with wide array of Indonesian dishes. A prasmanan is quite similar to rijsttafel but without the ceremonial waiters and usually served fewer choices of dishes compared to its flamboyant colonial predecessor. It is an Indonesian buffet as it employs a long table with a wide range of dishes, both savoury and sweet, served on it. It can usually be found in wedding ceremonies or any other festivities. The layout for an Indonesian wedding ceremony buffet is usually: plates, eating utensils (spoon and fork), and paper napkins placed on one end, followed by rice (plain or fried), a series of Indonesian (and sometimes international) dishes, sambal and krupuk (shrimp crackers), and ending with glasses of water on the other end of the table.

Beverages
Non-alcoholic beverages
The most common and popular Indonesian drinks and beverages are teh (tea) and kopi (coffee). Indonesian households commonly serve teh manis (sweet tea) or kopi tubruk to guests. Since the colonial era of Netherlands East Indies, plantations, especially in Java, were major producers of coffee, tea and sugar. Since then hot and sweet coffee and tea beverages have been enjoyed by Indonesians. Jasmine tea is the most popular tea variety drunk in Indonesia, however recent health awareness promotions have made green tea a popular choice. Usually coffee and tea are served hot, but cold iced sweet tea is also frequently drunk. Kopi luwak is Indonesian exotic and expensive coffee beverage made from the beans of coffee berries which have been eaten by the Asian palm civet (Paradoxurus hermaphroditus) and other related civets. Teh botol, bottled sweet jasmine tea, is now quite popular and locally competes favourably with international bottled soda beverages such as Coca-Cola and Fanta. Kopi susu (coffee with sweetened condensed milk) is an Indonesian version of Café au lait. Es kelapa muda or young coconut ice is fresh drink which is made from chilled young coconut water, coconut flesh and syrup. It is among favourite beverage in Indonesia.
Fruit juices (jus) are very popular. Varieties include orange (jus jeruk), guava (jus jambu), mango (jus mangga), soursop (jus sirsak) and avocado (jus alpokat), the last of these being commonly served with condensed milk and chocolate syrup as a dessert-like treat. Durian can be made into ice cream called es durian.

Many popular drinks are based on ice (es) and can also be classified as desserts. Typical examples include young coconut (es kelapa muda), grass jelly (es cincau), cendol (es cendol or es dawet), avocado, jackfruit and coconut with shredded ice and condensed milk (es teler), mixed ice (es campur), kidney beans (es kacang merah), musk melon (es blewah), and seaweed (es rumput laut).
Hot sweet beverages can also be found, such as bajigur and bandrek which are particularly popular in West Java. Both are coconut milk or coconut sugar (gula jawa) based hot drinks, mixed with other spices. Sekoteng, a ginger based hot drink which includes peanuts, diced bread, and pacar cina, can be found in Jakarta and West Java. Wedang jahe (hot ginger drink) and wedang ronde (a hot drink with sweet potato balls) are particularly popular in Yogyakarta, Central Java, and East Java.

Alcoholic beverages
As a Muslim-majority country, Indonesian Muslims share Islamic dietary laws that prohibit alcoholic beverages. Since ancient times, local alcoholic beverages were developed in the archipelago. According to a Chinese source, people of ancient Java drank wine made from palm sap called tuak (palm wine). Today tuak continues to be popular in the Batak region, North Sumatra. A traditional Batak bar serving tuak is called lapo tuak. In Solo, Central Java, ciu (a local adaptation of Chinese wine) is known. Bottled brem bali (Balinese rice wine) is popular in Bali. In Nusa Tenggara and Maluku Islands the people also drink palm wine, locally known as sopi. In the Minahasa region of North Sulawesi, the people drink a highly alcoholic drink called Cap Tikus. Indonesians developed local brands of beer, such as Bintang Beer and Anker Beer.

Eating establishment
In Indonesia, dishes are served from a fine dining restaurant in five-star hotel, a simple restaurant downtown, humble street side warung under the tent, to street hawker peddling their gerobak (cart) or pikulan (carrying using rod).

Restaurant and warung
In Indonesia rumah makan means restaurant, while warung means small and humble shop. From these eating establishments, a warteg (warung Tegal) and rumah makan Padang are particularly notable for their ubiquitousness in Indonesian cities and towns.
A warteg or warung tegal is a more specific warung nasi, established by Javanese people from the town Tegal in Central Java. They sells favourite Javanese dishes and rice, the wide array of pre-cooked dishes are arranged in glass windowed cupboard. They are well known on selling modestly priced meals, popular among working class such as low-skilled labours in the cities. While rumah makan Padang is a Padang restaurant, a smaller scale Padang eateries might be called warung Padang.
Most of Indonesian restaurants are based upon specific regional cuisine tradition. For example, rumah makan Padang are definitely Minangkabau cuisine. Sundanese saung restaurant or colloquially called as kuring restaurants are selling Sundanese dishes. This includes Bataks' lapo, Manado and Balinese restaurants. While other restaurants might specifically featuring their best specific dishes, for example Ayam goreng Mbok Berek, Bakmi Gajah Mada, Satay Senayan, Rawon Setan Surabaya, Pempek Pak Raden, etc.

Street food
Indonesian street food are usually cheap, offer a great variety of food of different tastes, and can be found on every corner of the city.
Street and street-side vendors are common, in addition to hawkers peddling their goods on bicycles or carts. These carts are known as pedagang kaki lima. These food hawkers on carts or bicycles might be travelling on streets, approaching potential buyers through residential areas whilst announcing their presence, or stationing themselves on a packed and busy street side, setting simple seating under a small tent and waiting for customers. Many of these have their own distinctive call, tune, or noise to announce their presence. For example, bakso sellers will hit the side of a soup bowl using a spoon, whereas nasi goreng sellers announce themselves by hitting their wok.

In most cities, it is common to see Chinese dishes such as bakpao (steamed buns with sweet and savoury fillings), bakmie (noodles), and bakso (meatballs) sold by street vendors and restaurants, often adapted to become Indonesian-Chinese cuisine. One common adaptation is that pork is rarely used since the majority of Indonesians are Muslims. Other popular Indonesian street food and snacks are siomay and batagor (abbreviated from bakso tahu goreng), pempek (deep fried fish cake), bubur ayam (chicken congee), bubur kacang hijau (mung beans porridge), satay, nasi goreng (English: fried rice), soto mie (soto noodle), mie ayam (chicken noodle) and mie goreng (fried noodle), taoge goreng (mung bean sprouts and noodle salad), asinan (preserved vegetables or fruits salad), laksa, kerak telor (spicy omelette), gorengan (Indonesian assorted fritters) and bakwan (fried dish of beansprouts and batter).
Indonesian street snacks include iced and sweet beverages, such as es cendol or es dawet, es teler, es cincau, es doger, es campur, es potong, and es puter. Indonesian cakes and cookies are often called jajanan pasar (market munchies).

Snacks
Kue
Indonesia has a rich collection of snacks called kue (cakes and pastry), both savoury and sweet. Traditional kue usually made from rice flour, coconut milk, coconut sugar and mostly steamed or fried instead of baked. Traditional kue are popularly known as kue basah ("wet kue") that has a moist and soft texture because of rich coconut milk. The kue kering (dried kue) is local name for cookies.
Indonesia has rich variations of kue, both native-origin or foreign-influenced. Popular ones include Bika Ambon, kue pisang, kue cubit, klepon, onde-onde, nagasari, kue pandan, lupis, lemang, lemper, lontong, tahu isi, getuk, risoles, pastel, lumpia, bakpia, lapis legit, soes, poffertjes and bolu kukus.

Traditional crackers
Traditional crackers are called krupuk, made from bits of shrimp, fish, vegetables or nuts, which are usually consumed as a crunchy snack or to accompany main meals. These crispy snacks sometimes are added upon the main meal to provide crunchy texture; several Indonesian dishes such as gado-gado, karedok, ketoprak, lontong sayur, nasi uduk, asinan and bubur ayam are known to require specific type of krupuk as toppings. There are wide variations of krupuk available across Indonesia. The most popular ones would be krupuk udang (prawn crackers) and krupuk kampung or krupuk putih (cassava crackers).
Other popular types include krupuk kulit (dried buffalo-skin crackers), emping melinjo (gnetum gnemon crackers), and kripik (chips or crisps), such as kripik pisang (banana chips) and keripik singkong (Cassava chips), rempeyek, is a flour-based cracker with brittle of peanuts, anchovies or shrimp bound by crispy flour cracker, rengginang or intip (Javanese) is rice cracker made from sun-dried and deep fried leftover rice.

Fruits
Indonesian markets abound with many types of tropical fruit. These are an important part of the Indonesian diet, either eaten freshly, or made into juices (such as jus alpukat), desserts (such as es buah and es teler), processed in savoury and spicy dishes like rujak, fried like pisang goreng (fried banana), cooked into cakes (such as kue pisang or bika ambon), sweetened and preserved such as sale pisang and manisan buah, or processed into kripik (crispy chips) as snacks like jackfruit or banana chips.
Many of these tropical fruits such as mangga (mango), manggis (mangosteen), rambutan, cempedak, nangka (jackfruit), durian, jambu air, duku (langsat), jeruk bali (pomelo), belimbing (carambola), kedondong and pisang (banana), are indigenous to Indonesian archipelago; while others have been imported from other tropical countries, although the origin of many of these fruits might be disputed. Klengkeng (longan) were introduced from India, semangka (watermelon) from Africa, kesemek from China, while alpukat (avocado), sawo, markisa (passionfruit), sirsak (soursop), nanas (pineapple), jambu biji (guava) and pepaya (papaya) were introduced from the Americas. Many of these tropical fruits are seasonally available, according to each species flowering and fruiting seasons. While certain fruits such as banana, watermelon, pineapple and papaya are available all year round.
Today, Indonesian markets is also enrichen with selections of home-grown non-tropical fruits that is not native to Indonesia. Strawberry, melon, apple, pear and dragon fruit are introduced and grown in cooler Indonesian highlands such as Malang in mountainous East Java, Puncak and Lembang near Bandung, to mimic their native subtropics habitat.

In the last few years, fruit chips have been more and more various. In the old times, banana and jackfruit chips were the most common, but now Indonesian fruit chips are also made from strawberry, apple, dragonfruit, pepino, watermelon, melon, more. Malang, a city in East Java, is the centre of fruit chip production aside from tempeh chips.
Banana and coconut are particularly important, not only to Indonesian cuisine, but also in other uses, such as timber, bedding, roofing, oil, plates and packaging. Banana leaf and janur (young coconut leaf) are particularly important for packaging and cooking process, employed to make pepes, lontong and ketupat.

Health
Nutrition
Much carbohydrate intake in Indonesian cuisine comes from rice, while in eastern parts of Indonesia, yam and sago are common. Indonesian protein intake comes from soy bean products that are processed into tofu and tempeh. Chicken eggs, poultry and meats are also consumed. Most of the fat intake comes from cooking oil (coconut oil) of fried dishes, coconut milk, peanuts, as well as meats and offals.
Some Indonesian fruit and vegetable dishes such as fruit rujak, gado-gado, karedok, pecel, lalab, capcay, tofu and tempeh are foods with low fat and high fibre. Tempeh, for example, is a vegetarian substitute for meat. Some dishes, especially gorengan (deep-fried fritters) and those dishes infused or caramelised with coconut milk, such as rendang and gulai, might taste succulent but are rich in saturated fat.

Food safety
The authentic traditional Indonesian home cooking is freshly made and consumed daily with minimal or no processed, canned or preserved foods, which means there is a minimal amount of preservatives and sodium. Most ingredients are bought fresh very early in the morning from local traditional markets, cooked around the late morning and consumed mainly for lunch. The leftovers are stored in the cupboard or on the table covered with tudung saji (weaved bamboo food cover to protect the food from insects or other animals), all in room temperature to be heated and consumed again for dinner. Traditionally, Indonesian dishes are rarely stored for long periods of time, thus most of these dishes are cooked and consumed in the same day. Some exceptions apply to dried, salted, and processed food. For example, dry rendang may still be safe to consume for several days. Modern refrigeration technology is available in most households.

Hygiene
While most of Indonesian grocery products and food served in mid to upperscale eating establishments maintain food hygiene standard ranges from good to acceptable — regulated and supervised by Badan Pengawasan Obat dan Makanan (Indonesian Food and Drug Administration) — some warung traditional foodstalls and street vendors might have poor hygiene. The tropical microbes also might contribute to food poisoning cases mostly gastroenteritis, especially among foreigners during their stay in Indonesia. It is advisable to drink bottled or boiled drinking water, or choose cooked hot food instead of uncooked room temperatured ones sold by street vendors.

See also
Notes
References
Bibliography
Owen, Sri. "Indonesian Food and Cookery" ISBN 978-0907325000, Prospect Books, 1980.
Owen, Sri. "Sri Owen's Indonesian Food" ISBN 978-1910496718, Pavilion Books, 2015.
Wongso, William. "Flavors of Indonesia: William Wongso's Culinary Wonders", ISBN 978-9798926327 Bab Publishing, 2016.
Ford, Eleanor. "Fire Islands: Recipes from Indonesia", ISBN 978-1911632047 Murdoch Books, 2019.

External links
 Media related to Cuisine of Indonesia at Wikimedia Commons
 Cuisine of Indonesia at the Wikibooks Cookbook subproject

## List of museums in Indonesia
This list includes many  museums and cultural institutions in Indonesia (including aquariums, zoos, and botanical gardens, following the definition of the International Council of Museums).
Heritage buildings such as candi, mosques, colonial churches and buildings with no site museum should not be placed in the list.

History
Colonial period
Before the 20th-century, there was little interest in the study of the native culture of Indonesia by the colonial government. Most anthropologic studies were done by a few non-governmental institutions and individuals. Among the non-governmental institution was the Batavian Society of Arts and Science, which established a museum for Indonesian culture and history. Individuals e.g. Sir Stamford Raffles and Dr. Snoeck Hourgrogne wrote valuable studies on native culture and history before the 20th century.
The first museum in Indonesia seems to have been that built by Rumphius in Ambon, built in 1662. Nothing remains of it except books written by himself, which are now in the library of the National Museum. Its successor was the Batavia Society of Art and Science, established on 24 April 1778. It built a museum and a library, played an important role in research, and collected much material on the natural history and culture of Indonesia. It later came under the direct control of the British Lieutenant-Governor Raffles who, among other things, provided it with a new office building for the museum and library administration. The museum collection and library continued to grow, and in 1862 the government built, in the center of New Batavia, what is now the National Museum, the previous building is now Wayang Museum in Jakarta Old Town. The whole collection was transferred to the Government of the Republic of Indonesia in 1962.

The Batavia Society of Art and Science also specialized in social sciences. In 1817 it made the plans for the Hortus Botanicus Bogoriense in Bogor. In 1894 it set up the Museum Zoologicum Bogoriense. The Bibliotheca Bogoriense made Bogor into an important center of biological science.
Except for the Radya Pustaka Museum in Surakarta (1890), no other major museums were established in the 19th century. It was only in the 1930s that local museums began to appear, usually privately initiated, by civil servants and Catholic and Protestant missionaries. These museums are praiseworthy, but are not always in expert hands, and are often run by boards which do not always function continually. Some museums suffer from the lack of regular resources, and some have disappeared completely, e.g. the Karo Museum in Berastagi, North Sumatra, set up by Dr Neuman, was abolished during the Japanese occupation (1942–45); and the Banjarmasin Museum built by Dr Malinkrodt, an expert on customs and traditions in Kalimantan, was burned down.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the colonial government became interested in the maintenance and restoration of cultural remains. In 1901 it set up the Commissie in Nederlandsch Indie voor Oudheidkundige Onderzoek van Java en Madoera, headed by Dr J. L. A. Brandes. In 1913, this became the more effective Oudheid-kundige Dienst van Nederlandsch Indie (Archaeological Service), under Professor Dr. N.J. Kromm. The government also employed officials to make a study of local languages and started the Kantoor voor Inlandsche Zaken.
In 1918 Balai Poestaka was created to publish books of literary value in Malay and local languages. Malay was taught in schools next to the local language. Prospective civil servants were obliged to study the language and customs of the region they were to work in. Training was given in Leiden, in the Netherlands. Native Indonesians also came to realize the importance of their national culture in awakening nationalism, part of a general contemporary phenomenon in Asia. This nationalism was pioneered by Budi Utomo in 1908 in the STOVIA, whose building, the School for Javanese Doctors, is converted into a museum today.
Modern technology and cultural change leads to disappearance of indigenous handicrafts. There was no longer a market for plait-work, textiles, earthenware, and brass, silver and gold objects. The result was a gradual process of cultural impoverishment. A need for money forced people to sell their heirlooms on the market, and many objects that should have been kept in Indonesia found their way to foreign countries. This condition prompted the building of the Sana Budaya Museum in Yogyakarta in 1935. Dr. F. D. K. Bosch, then Head of the Archaeology Service, and now Museum Director of the Batavia Society, first referred to cultural impoverishment, and the need for historical and cultural museums, to encourage people to appreciate their own products and to improve the quality of their handicrafts.

The late Director of the Municipal Museum of Surabaya, Von Faber, emphasized the role of museums in education. The famous painter, Walter Spies, actively helped in the creation and management of the Bali Museum in Denpasar. Unfortunately, the decision to establish museums at the time was not matched by a determination to find experts capable of managing them properly. Only a few language experts like Professor Husein Jayadiningrat and Professor Dr. Purbacaraka were interested in museums-mainly because the university produced few experts in history and the social
sciences, but concentrated on training physicians, lawyers, technicians and civil servants. It was not until independence that the social sciences began to develop.

Japanese occupation
During the brief period of Japanese occupation between 1942 and 1945, there was a stimulation on Indonesian culture. One of the cultural society established by the colonial Japanese government was the Keimin Bunka Sidosho or KBS in 1943. The core policy of the KBS is to promote the cultural unity of the "Greater East Asia". Agus Jaya was appointed as head of the arts, Usmar Ismail as head of film and drama, Armijn Pane as head of literature, and Ibu Sud as head of dance and singing. The KBS actively held exhibitions and performances in big cities of the Japanese-occupied Dutch East Indies. During the three-and-a-half years of Japanese occupation, the Indonesian arts flourish with dozens of art exhibitions, performances, and awards. Among local artists member of the KBS were Emiria Sunassa, Henk Ngantung, Agus Djaya, Kartono Yudokusumo, Dullah, Basuki Resobowo, Sudiardjo, Otto Djaja, Subanto, Abdulsalam, Suyono, Surono, Siauw Tik Kwie, Ong Lian Hong, Tan Sun Tiang, Liwem Wan Gie, Harijadi S, Tan Liep Poen, Sukardi, Affandi and S. Tutur.
Another movement founded by the Japanese government was the People's Power Movement (Poesat Tenaga Rakjat, Poetera) on 9 March 1942. Even though Poetera was largely a political organization, the movement had its own cultural division, with native artist Sodjojono appointed as the head of the fine arta and cultural division.

Post-independence
The newly independent government of Indonesia established the Ministry of Education and Culture in accordance with Article 32 in the 1945 Constitution. The Department of Culture was divided into Archaeological, Art, and Language Divisions. The Art Division set up several educational institutions including the Indonesian Academy of Fine Arts in Yogyakarta (1950), the Indonesian School of Music in Yogyakarta (1952), and Karawitan Conservatoire in Surakarta (1950). In 1952, The Language Division was split into two, the first one retained the same name and the same position in the Department of Culture, the other was included in the Institute of Literature (former Instituut voor Taal en Cultuur Onderzoek, Faculteit der Lettera en Wijsbegeerte van de Universiteit van Indonesia). Also in 1952, the Department of Culture opened provincial "cultural offices" in Medan (North Sumatra), Bukit Tinggi (Central Sumatra), Palembang (South Sumatra), Jakarta, Bandung (West Java), Surabaya (East Java), Makassar (South Sulawesi), Denpasar (Bali) and Ambon (Moluccas).
In 1956, there were several changes in the Department of Culture, which include the additional responsibility of museum management (the Museum Section). Other changes were: the conversion of the Archaeological Division into the autonomous Institute of Archaeology; the Language Division in the Institute of Literature became the Language Division of the Literary Faculty of Indonesia; and the Language Division became the Sub-Division of Customs and Traditions.
Later, the Department of Culture was included into the Directorate of Culture as part of the ministerial reorganization of the 1960s. The reorganization also converted the Museum Section into the autonomous National Museum Institute. Following the reorganization, the Ministry of Education and Culture consisted of one Directorate of Culture and four autonomous institutes: Archaeology, Language & Literature, National Museums, and History & Anthropology. The responsibility of opening provincial "cultural offices" was given to the Inspectorate of Provincial Culture.

New Order Period
At the start of the New Order, the regime of Suharto converted the Ministry of Education and Culture into five Directorates-General. The Directorate-General of Culture itself was divided into five directorates: Art, Cultural Education, Archaeology & History, Museums, and Language & Literature. Other restructuring occurred in 1969, reducing the Directorates-General into three; this time the Directorate-General of Culture consisted of three directorates: Art, Art Education, and Museums; and four Institutes: National Language, Archaeology, History & Anthropology, and Music & Choreography.
The New Order period also saw the expansion of the Armed Forces History Center and the encouragement of the development of museums of militaristic in nature. One of the reason for military involvement at first is because of the problem of internal divisions. This led to an accepted strategy of promoting shared values and identity across the forces through the use of a centralized military museum for older and younger generations of the soldiers. Some of these museums for which the Armed Forces was directly responsible are Satria Mandala Armed Forces Museum (opened in 1972), Museum of the Sacred Pancasila Monument (1982), Museum of Eternal Vigilance (1987), Soldiership Museum (1987), and the Museum of Communist Treachery (1993). The collection of these museums feature relics, photographs, and weapons. Dioramas are extensively used by the Armed Forces History Center, whom method was chosen because of a general lack of perceived value in historical objects in Indonesia as well as lack of funds.

Expansion
The number of museums in Indonesia in 1945 was 26 (including aquariums, zoos, and botanical gardens (following the definition of the International Council of Museums). Between 1945 and 1968, this increased to 46. In 2010 there were 281 museums in Indonesia, 80 of which are State Museums. At the beginning of 2015, the number of museums in Indonesia was 325. As of May 2015, Indonesia had 412 museums.
The Directorate for Museums introduced categories for the various collection types: there are general and special museums, there are privately maintained and state-run museums, both by the central and provincial governments. Those museums kept by the central government in the main operate under the administration of the Ministry of Education and Culture. Military museums are supervised by the Defence Ministry.
The most frequent type is the General Provincial Museum (Museum Umum Propinsi) which exists in almost all provincial capitals. These museums usually consist of several sections: natural history (geological, biology), ethnography, and history. Objects are sometimes flatly arranged in display cases with poor explanations. More recently established museums have already achieved higher standards with thoughtful and appealing expositions.
In Indonesia, the increase in the number of museums has not yet been matched by an increase in quality. Buildings are often unsuitable for display and for socio-educational activities; competent staffs are lacking; the public does not yet appreciate the educational role of museums; funds are lacking to maintain collections and extend building; and so on. There are not enough museums for 120 million inhabitants and a large number of State and private universities. Big cities like Jakarta, Medan, Surabaya, Bandung and Semarang need centers for science and culture, and museums as places of study and leisure.

Museums by region
Jakarta
Jakarta contains the most museums in Indonesia with over 50 museums within its 661 square kilometers area. The museums in Jakarta cluster around the Central Jakarta Merdeka Square area, Jakarta Old Town, and Taman Mini Indonesia Indah.
The Jakarta Old Town contains museums that are former institutional buildings of Colonial Batavia. Some of the notable museums are: Jakarta History Museum (former City Hall of Batavia), Wayang Museum (former Church of Batavia), the Fine Art and Ceramic Museum (former Court House of Justice of Batavia), the Maritime Museum (former Sunda Kelapa warehouse), Bank Indonesia Museum (former De Javasche Bank), and Bank Mandiri Museum (former Netherlands Trading Society).
Several museums clustered in central Jakarta around the Merdeka Square area include: National Museum of Indonesia, Monas, Istiqlal Islamic Museum in Istiqlal mosque, and Jakarta Cathedral Museum on the second floor of Jakarta Cathedral. Also in the central Jakarta area is the Taman Prasasti Museum (former cemetery of Batavia), and Textile Museum in Tanah Abang area.
The recreational area of Taman Mini Indonesia Indah in East Jakarta contains almost twenty museums since the 1970s within its complex.

North Jakarta and Thousand Islands
Maritime Museum
Onrust Archaeology Park

West Jakarta
Jakarta Old Town
Bank Indonesia Museum
Mandiri Museum
Fine Art and Ceramic Museum
Jakarta History Museum or Museum Fatahillah
Wayang Museum
Jakarta Textile Museum
Museum Lukisan Universitas Pelita Harapan
Museum 12 Mei Universitas Trisakti
The Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in Nusantara

Central Jakarta
Bentara Budaya Jakarta
Formulation of Proclamation Text Museum (the site where the text of the nation's proclamation of independence was composed in 1945)
Gedung Joang '45
Gedung Kesenian Jakarta
Gedung Mohammad Hoesni Thamrin
Jakarta Cathedral Museum
Jakarta Planetarium
Museum of Indonesian History in Monas
Museum Adam Malik (1985, closed in 2005)
Museum Anatomi Fakultas Kedokteran Universitas Indonesia
Museum Jenderal Besar Abdul Haris Nasution
Museum Kebangkitan Nasional
Museum Pers ANTARA
Museum Puri Bhakti Renatama
Museum Sasmita Loka Jenderal Ahmad Yani
Museum Sumpah Pemuda
National Gallery of Indonesia
National Museum or Museum Gajah
Taman Prasasti Museum

East Jakarta
Museum Loka Jala Srana
Museum of PKI Treason
Monument of Sacred Pancasila
Taman Mini Indonesia Indah
Asmat Museum
Indonesian Hakka Museum, formal opening at August 30, 2014
Indonesia Museum
Indonesia Soldiership Museum
Indonesia Stamp Museum
Insect Museum and Butterfly Park
Istiqlal Museum
Komodo Indonesian Fauna Museum and Reptile Park
Museum of Electricity and New Energy
Museum of Heirloom
Museum of Lighting
Museum of Science and Technology
Museum of Transportation
Oil and Natural Gas Museum
Purna Bhakti Pertiwi Museum
Timor Timur Museum

South Jakarta
Basoeki Abdullah Museum
Harry Dharsono Museum
Kites Museum of Indonesia
Museum Dirgantara Mandala
Museum Kriminal (Mabak)
Museum Manggala Wanabhakti
Polri Museum
Ragunan Zoo
Reksa Artha Museum
Satria Mandala Museum

Java
Banten
Benteng Heritage Museum, Tangerang

West Java
Amerta Dirgantara Museum, Subang
Asian–African Conference Museum, Bandung (1980)
Bandung Geological Museum, Bandung (1928)
Bandung Zoo, Bandung (1933)
Barli Museum, Bandung
Bogor Botanical Garden, Bogor (1817)
Bogor Zoological Museum, Bogor (1894)
Cibodas Botanical Garden, Cibodas (1852)
Ethnobotanical Museum, Bogor
Indonesia Post Museum, Bandung
Kraton Kacirebonan Museum, Cirebon
Kraton Kasepuhan Museums, Cirebon:
Museum Diorama Bale Panyawangan, Purwakarta (2015)
Museum Kereta Singa Barong
Museum Benda Kuno
Museum Linggarjati, Kuningan
Museum Palangan B. Kokosan, Sukabumi
Pembela Tanah Air Museum, Bogor
Museum Bank Indonesia, Bandung
Museum Perjuangan Jawa Barat, Bandung
Museum Perjuangan Jawa Barat, Bogor
Museum Prabu Geusan Ulun, Purwakarta
Museum Tanah Nasrel, Bogor
Percandian Batujaya Museum, Karawang
Sri Baduga Museum, Bandung (1980)
Tambaksari's Site Museum, Ciamis
Wangsit Mandala Siliwangi Museum

Central Java
Ambarawa Railway Museum, Ambarawa
Borobudur Complex, Magelang
Karmawibhangga Museum (1983)
Samudra Raksa Museum (2005)
Danar Hadi Batik Museum, Surakarta (2008)
Indonesian World Records Museum, Semarang
Keraton Surakarta Museum, Surakarta
Kretek Museum, Kudus
National Press Monument and Museum, Surakarta
Pekalongan Batik Museum, Pekalongan (1972)
Radya Pustaka Museum, Surakarta (1890)
Ranggawarsita Museum, Semarang
Sangiran archeology museum, Sangiran
Tumurun Private Museum, Surakarta

Special Region of Yogyakarta
Due to the importance of Yogyakarta during the war of independence from the Dutch, there are numerous memorials and museums. Monument Yogya Kembali and Fort Vredeburg Museum are two major museums of about 11 named in the city.

Affandi Museum
Code Museum
Dewantara Kirti Griya Museum
Dharma Wiratama Museum
Dirgantara Mandala Museum
Fort Vredeburg Museum
Gembira Loka Zoo
Jogja National Museum
Kraton Yogyakarta Museum
Hamengkubuwono IX Museum
Train Museum
Monumen Pahlawan Pancasila
Museum Batik "Ciptowening"
Museum Karbol TNI Angkatan Udara
Museum Kayu Wanagama
Museum Kebun Raya Gembira Loka
Museum of Biology Gadjah Mada University
Museum of Geotechnology and Mineral
Museum Pergerakan Wanita
Museum Perjuangan Yogyakarta
Museum Purbakala Pleret
Museum Pura Paku Alaman
Museum R.S. Mata "Dr. Yap"
Museum Tani Jawa Indonesia
Museum Tembi (Rumah Budaya Tembi)
Nyoman Gunarsa Museum
Prambanan Museum
Museum Sasmitaloka Panglima Besar (Pangsar) Jenderal Sudirman
Sonobudoyo Museum (1939)
Sasana Wiratama
Taman Budaya Yogyakarta
Museum Anak Kolong Tangga
Ullen Sentalu Museum
Wayang Kekayon Museum
Yogyakarta Batik Museum
Yogya Kembali Museum, Sleman Regency
Museum Sandi

East Java
10th November Museum, Surabaya
Airlangga Museum, Kediri
Bank Indonesia Museum, Surabaya
Batu Secret Zoo, Batu
Brawijaya Museum, Malang
Health Museum of Dr. Adhyatma, Surabaya
House of Sampoerna, Surabaya
Mpu Tantular State Museum, Buduran, Sidoarjo
Museum Angkut, Batu
Malang Tempo Doeloe Museum, Malang
Mpu Tantular Museum, Sidoarjo
Indonesian Islamic Museum K.H. Hasyim Asy'ari, Jombang
Nahdlatul Ulama Museum, Surabaya
Submarine Monument, Surabaya
Surabaya Zoo, Surabaya
Trowulan Museum, Trowulan (1987)
Bondowoso Rail and Train Museum, Bondowoso Regency

Lesser Sunda Islands
Bali
Agung Rai Museum of Art
Bali Botanic Garden, Bedugul (1959)
Bali Museum (1930)
Blanco Renaissance Museum
Buleleng Museum, Singaraja
Le Mayeur Museum, Sanur
Museum Pasifika
Museum Rudana
Museum Semarajaya
Neka Art Museum, Ubud (1982)
Gedong Arca Museum
Puri Lukisan Museum

West Nusa Tenggara
West Nusa Tenggara State Museum (1982)

East Nusa Tenggara
East Nusa Tenggara State Museum

Sumatra
Most museums in Sumatra are ethnographic musea specializing in cultural heritage e.g. textiles and other traditional artifacts.

Aceh
Aceh Museum, Banda Aceh (1915)
Aceh Tsunami Museum, Banda Aceh (2009)
Cut Nyak Dhien Mansion Museum
Museum Malikussaleh, Lhokseumawe

North Sumatra
Batak Museum, Balige
Maimun Palace Museum, Medan
Museum Huta Bolon Simanindo, Simanindo
Museum Joang '45, Medan
Museum Perjuangan TNI Kodam I Bukit Barisan, Medan (1971)
Museum Rumah Bolon Pematang Purba, Pematang purba
Museum Simalungun, Pematangsiantar (1940)
Nias Heritage Museum, Gunungsitoli (1991). The only museum in Nias, was destroyed by the Boxing Day Tsunami. A new building for the museum has been constructed.
North Sumatra Museum, Medan (1982)
Sumatran Numismatic Museum, Medan (2017)
TB Silalahi Center, Balige Subdistrict (2008)
Tjong A Fie Mansion Museum, Medan
Zoological Museum of Pematangsiantar, Pematangsiantar (1936)

Riau Province and Riau Islands
Bagansiapiapi Chinese Museum, Bagansiapiapi
Bagansiapiapi Fish Museum, Bagansiapiapi
Bagansiapiapi History Museum, Bagansiapiapi
Bagansiapiapi Muslim Museum, Bagansiapiapi
Museum Kandil Riau, Tanjung Pinang (1988)
Museum Sang Nila Utama, Pekanbaru (1994)
Siak Sri Indrapura Palace Museum, Indrapura (Building from 1889)
Museum Sultan Sulaiman Badrul Alamsyah, Tanjung Pinang

West Sumatra
Adityawarman Museum, Padang (1977)
Bung Hatta Museum, Bukittinggi
Buya Hamka Birthplace Museum, Agam (2001)
Tri Daya Eka Dharma Museum, Bukittinggi
30 September 2009 Earthquake Museum, Padang (2012)
Gedung Joang '45, Padang
Goedang Ransoem Museum, Sawahlunto
Galeri Tambang Mbah Soero, Sawahlunto
Information Center of Minangkabau Culture, Padang Panjang (1990)
Museum Rumah Adat Baanjuang, Fort de Kock, Bukittinggi
Railway Museum, Sawahlunto
Museum Taman Bundo Kandung, Bukittinggi (1934)
Museum Tri Daya Eka Dharma, Bukittinggi (1973)
Bukittinggi Zoological Museum, Bukittinggi
Pagaruyung Palace Museum
Rumah Puisi Taufiq Ismail, Tanah Datar
Rumah Kelahiran Tan Malaka, Lima Puluh Kota
Rasuna Said Mansion Museum

Bengkulu
Bengkulu State Museum
Fort Marlborough, Bengkulu City

Jambi
Jambi Museum, Jambi City (1988)
Muaro Jambi Temple Compounds Site Museum, Muaro Jambi Regency
Museum Perjuangan Rakyat Jambi, Jambi City (1993)

South Sumatra and Bangka–Belitung Islands
Al-Qur'an Al-Akbar Museum
Balaputradeva Museum, Palembang
Museum Monpera, Palembang
Museum UPT Belitung, Belitung
Sriwijaya Kingdom Archaeological Park, Palembang
Sultan Mahmud Badaruddin II Museum, Palembang
Textile Museum, Palembang
Word Museum, Belitung

Lampung
Ruwa Jurai Museum, Bandar Lampung (1988)

Kalimantan
Most museums in Kalimantan specialized on cultural heritage such as textiles and other traditional artifacts. In South Kalimantan, most museums are shaped like the traditional Banjar house.

Central Kalimantan
Balanga Museum, Palangkaraya
Kayu Sampit Museum, East Kotawaringin Regency
Lewu Hante Museum, Pasar Panas, East Barito Regency

North Kalimantan
Bulungan Sultanate Museum, Bulungan Regency

East Kalimantan
Kalimantan Art Gallery, Samarinda
Mulawarman State Museum, Tenggarong Subdistrict
Museum Batiwakkal, Gunung Tabur Subdistrict, Berau Regency
Museum Kayu Tuah Himba, Tenggarong Subdistrict
Museum Perjuangan Merah Putih, Sanga-Sanga Subdistrict
Sadurengas Museum, Paser Belengkong Subdistrict
Sendawar Museum, West Kutai Regency

South Kalimantan
Candi Agung Museum, Amuntai, North Hulu Sungai Regency
Lambung Mangkurat State Museum, Banjarbaru
Wasaka Museum, Banjarmasin

West Kalimantan
West Kalimantan Provincial Museum, Pontianak
Museum Dara Juanti, Sintang
Museum Istana Kadriyah, Pontianak
Museum Kapuas Raya, Sintang

Sulawesi
Most museums in Sulawesi specialize in cultural heritage such as textiles and other traditional artifacts.

North Sulawesi
Manado Wanua Paksinata North Sulawesi Provincial Museum, Manado

Central Sulawesi
Kaili Souraja Museum, Kaili
Souraja, Palu
Palu Central Sulawesi Provincial Museum, Palu

South Sulawesi
Museum Batara Guru, Wara Utama Subdistrict
Museum Indo' Ta'dung, Kete Kesu, Toraja Utara
Museum La Galigo, Fort Rotterdam, Makassar
Sungguminasa Balla Lompoa Museum, near Ujung Pandang

Southeast Sulawesi
Buton Palace Museum, Baubau, Buton Island
Southeast Sulawesi State Museum, Kendari

The Moluccas
Ambon was the site of the first recorded museum in Indonesia, a botanical museum built by Georg Eberhard Rumphius in 1662. Nothing remains of it except books written by himself, which are now in the library of the National Museum of Indonesia.
Today, museums in the Moluccas specialize in Ambonese ethnography or artifacts from the earlier Sultanates in the Moluccas.

Maluku
Siwa Lima State Museum, Ambon (1973)

Maluku Islands
Kedaton Sultan Ternate Museum, Kota Ternate Utara Subdistrict, Ternate (1982)
Sonyie Malige Museum, Tidore
World War II and Trikora Museum, Morotai

Papua
Papua province
Asmat Museum of Culture and Progress, Agats (1973)
Loka Budaya Museum, Cenderawasih University, Jayapura (1973)
Papua Province State Museum, Jayapura (1983)

See also
Tourism in Indonesia
Culture of Indonesia
List of museums

References
Cited works


== External links ==

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- Bali
- Nusa Penida
- Lombok
- Komodo Island
- Raja Ampat

## Famous Museums
- Jakarta Art Museum
- Taman Mini Indonesia Indah
- National Museum Jakarta
- Museum Sains Indonesia
- Indonesia Biodiversity Research Center

## Local Desserts
- Gudeg (Java)
- Nasi Goreng (Indonesian Fried Rice)
- Pisang Goreng (Fried Banana)
- Kue Ayam (Chicken Cake)
- Kopi Luwak (Fermented Coffee)
