--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Japan
FILE_NAME: country_japan.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:47:06
----------------

# Japan

## General Overview
Japan is an island country in East Asia. Located in the Pacific Ocean off the northeast coast of the Asian mainland, it is bordered to the west by the Sea of Japan, the Sea of Okhotsk in the north, and the East China Sea in the south. The Japanese archipelago consists of four major islands alongside over 14,000 smaller islands. Japan is divided into 47 administrative prefectures and eight traditional regions, and around 75% of its terrain is mountainous and heavily forested, concentrating its agriculture and highly urbanized population along its eastern coastal plains. With a population of almost 123 million as of 2026, it is the world's 11th most populous country. Tokyo is the country's capital and largest city.
The first known habitation of the archipelago dates to the Upper Paleolithic, with the beginning of the Japanese Paleolithic dating to c. 36,000 BC. Between the 4th and 6th centuries, its kingdoms were united under an emperor in Nara and later in Heian-kyō. From the 12th century, actual power was held by military aristocrats known as shōgun and feudal lords called daimyō, enforced by warrior nobility named samurai. After rule by the Kamakura and Ashikaga shogunates and a century of warring states, Japan was unified in 1600 by the Tokugawa shogunate, which implemented an isolationist foreign policy. In 1853, an American fleet forced Japan to open trade to the West, which led to the end of the shogunate and the restoration of imperial power in 1868.
The Meiji period saw Japan pursue rapid industrialization, modernization, militarism, and overseas colonization. Declaring itself an imperial power in 1889 with the promulgation of the Meiji Constitution, it annexed Taiwan in 1895, followed by Korea in 1910. In 1937, Japan invaded China and attacked the U.S. and European colonial powers in 1941, thus entering World War II as an Axis power. After being defeated in the Pacific War and suffering the U.S. atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan surrendered in 1945 and came under Allied occupation. It underwent rapid economic growth in the following decades and became one of the first major non-NATO allies of the U.S. Since the collapse of the Japanese asset price bubble in the early 1990s, it has experienced a prolonged period of economic stagnation referred to as the Lost Decades.
Japan is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral legislature known as the National Diet. Widely considered a great power and the only Asian member of the G7, it maintains one of the world's strongest militaries but has constitutionally renounced its right to declare war. A developed country with one of the world's largest economies by nominal GDP, it is a global leader in the automotive, electronics, and robotics industries, in addition to making significant contributions to science and technology. It has one of the world's highest life expectancies, but is undergoing a population decline. The culture of Japan is well known around the world, particularly its popular culture as expressed in animation, art, comics, cuisine, fashion, films, music, television, theatre and video games.

Etymology
The name for Japan in Japanese is written using the kanji 日本 and is pronounced Nihon or Nippon. Before 日本 was adopted in the early 8th century, the country was known in China as Wa (倭, changed in Japan around 757 to 和) and in Japan by the endonym Yamato. Nippon, the original Sino-Japanese reading of the characters, is favored for official uses, including on Japanese banknotes and postage stamps. Nihon is typically used in everyday speech and reflects shifts in Japanese phonology during the Edo period. The characters 日本 mean 'sun origin', which is the source of the popular Western epithet "Land of the Rising Sun".
The name "Japan" is based on Min or Wu Chinese pronunciations of 日本 and was introduced to European languages through early trade. In the 13th century, Marco Polo recorded the Early Mandarin Chinese pronunciation of the characters 日本國 as Cipangu. The old Malay name for Japan, Japang or Japun, was borrowed from a southern coastal Chinese dialect and encountered by Portuguese traders in Southeast Asia, who brought the word to Europe in the early 16th century. The first version of the name in English appears in a book published in 1577, which spelled the name as Giapan in a translation of a 1565 Portuguese letter.

History
Prehistoric to classical history
Modern humans arrived in Japan around 38,000 years ago (~36,000 BC), marking the beginning of the Japanese Paleolithic. Around 14,500 BC (the start of the Jōmon period), a Mesolithic to Neolithic semi-sedentary hunter-gatherer culture characterized by pit dwelling and rudimentary agriculture emerged. Clay vessels from the period are among the oldest surviving examples of pottery. The Japonic-speaking Yayoi people later entered the archipelago from the Korean Peninsula, intermingling with the Jōmon people. The Yayoi period saw the introduction of innovative practices including wet-rice farming, a new style of pottery, and metallurgy from China and Korea. According to legend, Emperor Jimmu (descendant of Amaterasu) founded a kingdom in central Japan in 660 BC, beginning a continuous imperial line.
Japan first appears in written history in the Chinese Book of Han, completed in 111 AD, where it is described as having a hundred small kingdoms. A century later, the Book of Wei records that the kingdom of Yamatai (which may refer to Yamato) unified many of these kingdoms. Buddhism was introduced to Japan from Baekje (a Korean kingdom) in 552, but the development of Japanese Buddhism was primarily influenced by China. Despite early resistance, Buddhism was promoted by the ruling class, including figures like Prince Shōtoku, and gained widespread acceptance beginning in the Asuka period (592–710).
In 645, the government led by Prince Naka no Ōe and Fujiwara no Kamatari devised and implemented the far-reaching Taika Reforms. The Reform began with land reform, based on Confucian ideas and philosophies from China. It nationalized all land in Japan, to be distributed equally among cultivators, and ordered the compilation of a household registry as the basis for a new system of taxation. The true aim of the reforms was to bring about greater centralization and to enhance the power of the imperial court, which was also based on the governmental structure of China. Envoys and students were dispatched to China to learn about Chinese writing, politics, art, and religion.
The Jinshin War of 672, a bloody conflict between Prince Ōama and his nephew Prince Ōtomo, became a major catalyst for further administrative reforms. These reforms culminated with the promulgation of the Taihō Code, which consolidated existing statutes and established the structure of the central and subordinate local governments. These legal reforms created the ritsuryō state, a system of Chinese-style centralized government that remained in place for half a millennium.
The Nara period (710–784) marked the emergence of a Japanese state centered on the Imperial Court in Heijō-kyō (modern Nara). The period is characterized by the appearance of a nascent literary culture with the completion of the Kojiki (712) and Nihon Shoki (720), as well as the development of Buddhist-inspired artwork and architecture. A smallpox epidemic in 735–737 is believed to have killed as much as one-third of Japan's population. In 784, Emperor Kanmu moved the capital, settling on Heian-kyō (modern-day Kyoto) in 794. This marked the beginning of the Heian period (794–1185), during which a distinctly indigenous Japanese culture emerged. Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji and the lyrics of Japan's national anthem "Kimigayo" were written during this time.

Feudal era
Japan's feudal era was characterized by the emergence and dominance of a ruling class of warriors, the samurai. In 1185, following the defeat of the Taira clan by the Minamoto clan in the Genpei War, samurai Minamoto no Yoritomo established a military government at Kamakura. After Yoritomo's death, the Hōjō clan came to power as regents for the shōgun. The Zen school of Buddhism was introduced from China in the Kamakura period (1185–1333) and became popular among the samurai class.
The Kamakura shogunate repelled Mongol invasions in 1274 and 1281 but was eventually overthrown by Emperor Go-Daigo. Go-Daigo was defeated by Ashikaga Takauji in 1336, beginning the Muromachi period (1336–1573). The succeeding Ashikaga shogunate failed to control the feudal warlords (daimyō) and a civil war began in 1467, opening the century-long Sengoku period ('Warring States').
During the 16th century, Portuguese traders and Jesuit missionaries reached Japan, initiating direct commercial and cultural exchange between Japan and the West (see Nanban trade and Nanban art). Oda Nobunaga used European technology and firearms to conquer many other daimyō; his consolidation of power began the Azuchi–Momoyama period. After the death of Nobunaga in 1582, his successor, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, unified the nation in the early 1590s and launched two unsuccessful invasions of Korea in 1592 and 1597.
Tokugawa Ieyasu served as regent for Hideyoshi's son Toyotomi Hideyori within the Council of Five Elders and used his position to gain political and military support. When open war broke out, Ieyasu defeated rival clans in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600. He was appointed shōgun by Emperor Go-Yōzei in 1603 and established the Tokugawa shogunate at Edo (modern Tokyo). The shogunate enacted measures including Buke shohatto, as a code of conduct to control the autonomous daimyō, and in 1639 the isolationist sakoku ('closed country') policy that spanned the two and a half centuries of tenuous political unity known as the Edo period (1603–1868). Modern Japan's economic growth began in this period, resulting in roads (Kaidō) and water transportation routes, as well as financial instruments such as futures contracts, banking and insurance of the Osaka rice brokers. The study of Western sciences (rangaku) continued through contact with the Dutch enclave in Nagasaki. The Edo period gave rise to kokugaku ('national studies'), the study of Japan by the Japanese.

Modern era
The United States Navy sent Commodore Matthew C. Perry to force the opening of Japan to the outside world. Arriving at Uraga with four "Black Ships" in July 1853, the Perry Expedition resulted in the March 1854 Convention of Kanagawa. Subsequent similar treaties with other Western countries brought economic and political crises. The resignation of the shōgun led to the Boshin War and the establishment of a centralized state nominally unified under the emperor (the Meiji Restoration). Adopting Western political, judicial, and military institutions, the Cabinet organized the Privy Council, introduced the Meiji Constitution (November 29, 1890), and assembled the Imperial Diet.
During the Meiji period (1868–1912), the Empire of Japan emerged as the most developed state in Asia and as an industrialized world power that pursued military conflict to expand its sphere of influence. After victories in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895) and the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905), Japan gained control of Taiwan, Korea and the southern half of Sakhalin, and annexed Korea in 1910. The Japanese population doubled from 35 million in 1873 to 70 million by 1935, with a significant shift to urbanization.
The early 20th century saw a period of Taishō democracy (1912–1926) overshadowed by increasing expansionism and militarization. World War I allowed Japan, which joined the side of the victorious Allies, to capture German possessions in the Pacific and China in 1920. The 1920s saw a political shift towards statism, a period of lawlessness following the 1923 Great Tokyo Earthquake, the passing of laws against political dissent, and a series of attempted coups.
This process accelerated in the 1930s, spawning several radical nationalist groups that shared a hostility to liberal democracy and a dedication to expansion in Asia. In 1931, Japan invaded China and occupied Manchuria, which led to the establishment of puppet state of Manchukuo in 1932. Following international condemnation of the occupation, Japan resigned from the League of Nations in 1933. In 1936, Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact with Nazi Germany; the 1940 Tripartite Pact made it one of the Axis powers.

The Empire of Japan invaded other parts of China in 1937, precipitating the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945). In 1940, the Empire invaded French Indochina, after which the United States placed an oil embargo on Japan. On December 7–8, 1941, Japanese forces carried out surprise attacks on Pearl Harbor, as well as on British forces in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong, among others, beginning World War II in the Pacific. Throughout areas occupied by Japan during the war, numerous abuses were committed against local inhabitants. Many women were forced into sexual slavery.
After Allied victories during the next four years, which culminated in the Soviet invasion of Manchuria and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, Japan agreed to an unconditional surrender. The war cost Japan millions of lives and many of its conquered territories, including de jure parts of Japan such as Korea, Taiwan, Karafuto, and the Kurils. The Allies, led by the United States, repatriated millions of Japanese settlers from their former colonies and military camps throughout Asia, largely eliminating the Empire of Japan and its influence over the territories it conquered. The Allies convened the International Military Tribunal for the Far East to prosecute Japanese leaders except the Emperor for Japanese war crimes.
In 1947, Japan adopted a new constitution emphasizing liberal democratic practices. The Allied occupation ended with the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952, and Japan was granted membership in the United Nations in 1956. A period of record growth propelled Japan to become the world's second-largest economy at that time; this ended in the mid-1990s after the popping of an asset price bubble, beginning the "Lost Decade" characterized by economic stagnation and low inflation. On March 11, 2011, Japan suffered the Tōhoku earthquake—the largest by magnitude in its recorded history—which, along with the ensuing tsunami, triggered the Fukushima nuclear accident. On May 1, 2019, after the historic abdication of Emperor Akihito, his son Naruhito became Emperor, beginning the Reiwa era.

Geography
Japan comprises 14,125 islands extending along the Pacific coast of Asia. It stretches over 3000 km (1900 mi) northeast–southwest from the Sea of Okhotsk to the East China Sea. The country's five main islands, from north to south, are Hokkaido, Honshu, Shikoku, Kyushu and Okinawa. The Ryukyu Islands, which include Okinawa, are a chain to the south of Kyushu. The Nanpō Islands are south and east of the main islands of Japan. Together they are often known as the Japanese archipelago. As of 2019, Japan's territory is 377,975.24 km2 (145,937.06 sq mi). Japan has the sixth-longest coastline in the world at 29,751 km (18,486 mi). Because of its far-flung outlying islands, Japan's exclusive economic zone is the eighth-largest in the world, covering 4,470,000 km2 (1,730,000 sq mi).
The Japanese archipelago is 67% forests and 14% agricultural. The primarily rugged and mountainous terrain is restricted for habitation. Thus the habitable zones, mainly in the coastal areas, have very high population densities: Japan is the 40th most densely populated country even without considering that local concentration. Honshu has the highest population density at 450 persons/km2 (1200/sq mi) as of 2010, while Hokkaido has the lowest density of 64.5 persons/km2 as of 2016. As of 2014, approximately 0.5% of Japan's total area is reclaimed land (umetatechi). Lake Biwa is an ancient lake and the country's largest freshwater lake.
Japan is substantially prone to earthquakes, tsunami and volcanic eruptions because of its location along the Pacific Ring of Fire. It has the 17th highest natural disaster risk as measured in the 2016 World Risk Index. Japan has 111 active volcanoes. Destructive earthquakes, often resulting in tsunami, occur several times each century; the 1923 Tokyo earthquake killed over 140,000 people. More recent major quakes are the 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake and the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake, which triggered a large tsunami.

Climate
The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate but varies greatly from north to south. The northernmost region, Hokkaido, has a humid continental climate with long, cold winters and very warm to cool summers. Precipitation is not heavy, but the islands usually develop deep snowbanks in the winter.
In the Sea of Japan region on Honshu's west coast, northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall during winter. In the summer, the region sometimes experiences extremely hot temperatures because of the Foehn. The Central Highland has a typical inland humid continental climate, with large temperature differences between summer and winter. The mountains of the Chūgoku and Shikoku regions shelter the Seto Inland Sea from seasonal winds, bringing mild weather year-round.
The Pacific coast features a humid subtropical climate that experiences milder winters with occasional snowfall and hot, humid summers because of the southeast seasonal wind. The Ryukyu and Nanpō Islands have a subtropical climate, with warm winters and hot summers. Precipitation is very heavy, especially during the rainy season. The main rainy season begins in early May in Okinawa, and the rain front gradually moves north. In late summer and early autumn, typhoons often bring heavy rain. According to the Environment Ministry, heavy rainfall and increasing temperatures have caused problems in the agricultural industry and elsewhere. The highest temperature ever measured in Japan, 41.8 °C (107.2 °F), was recorded on August 5, 2025.

Biodiversity
Japan has nine forest ecoregions which reflect the climate and geography of the islands. They range from subtropical moist broadleaf forests in the Ryūkyū and Bonin Islands, to temperate broadleaf and mixed forests in the mild climate regions of the main islands, to temperate coniferous forests in the cold, winter portions of the northern islands. Japan has over 90,000 species of wildlife as of 2019, including the brown bear, the Japanese macaque, the Japanese raccoon dog, the small Japanese field mouse, and the Japanese giant salamander. There are 53 Ramsar wetland sites in Japan. Five sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List for their outstanding natural value.

Environment
In the period of rapid economic growth after World War II, environmental policies were downplayed by the government and industrial corporations; as a result, environmental pollution was widespread in the 1950s and 1960s. Responding to rising concerns, the government introduced environmental protection laws in 1970. The oil crisis in 1973 also encouraged the efficient use of energy because of Japan's lack of natural resources.
Japan ranks 20th in the 2018 Environmental Performance Index, which measures a country's commitment to environmental sustainability. Japan is the world's fifth-largest emitter of carbon dioxide. As the host and signatory of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, Japan is under treaty obligation to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions and to take other steps to curb climate change. In 2020, the government of Japan announced a target of carbon-neutrality by 2050. Environmental issues include urban air pollution (NOx, suspended particulate matter, and toxics), waste management, water eutrophication, nature conservation, climate change, chemical management and international co-operation for conservation.

Government and politics
Japan is a unitary state and constitutional monarchy in which the power of the emperor (Tennō) is limited to a ceremonial role. Executive power is instead wielded by the prime minister and the Cabinet, whose sovereignty is vested in the Japanese people. Naruhito is the Emperor of Japan, having succeeded his father Akihito upon his accession to the Chrysanthemum Throne in 2019.

Japan's legislative organ is the National Diet, a bicameral parliament. It consists of a lower House of Representatives with 465 seats, elected by popular vote every four years or when dissolved, and an upper House of Councillors with 248 seats, whose popularly elected members serve six-year terms. There is universal suffrage for adults over 18 years of age, with a secret ballot for all elected offices. The prime minister as the head of government has the power to appoint and dismiss Ministers of State, and is appointed by the emperor after being designated from among the members of the Diet. Sanae Takaichi is Japan's prime minister; she took office after winning the 2025 Liberal Democratic Party leadership election and securing a confidence and supply agreement with Ishin. The broadly conservative Liberal Democratic Party has been the dominant party in the country since the 1950s, often called the 1955 System.
Historically influenced by Chinese law, the Japanese legal system developed independently during the Edo period through texts such as Kujikata Osadamegaki. Since the late 19th century, the judicial system has been largely based on the civil law of Europe, notably Germany. In 1896, Japan established a civil code based on the German Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, which remains in effect with post–World War II modifications. The Constitution of Japan, adopted in 1947, is the oldest unamended constitution in the world. Statutory law originates in the legislature, and the constitution requires that the emperor promulgate legislation passed by the Diet without giving him the power to oppose legislation. The main body of Japanese statutory law is called the Six Codes. Japan's court system is divided into four basic tiers: the Supreme Court and three levels of lower courts.

Administrative divisions
Japan is divided into 47 prefectures, each overseen by an elected governor and legislature. In the following table, the prefectures are grouped by region:

Foreign relations
A member state of the United Nations since 1956, Japan is one of the G4 countries seeking reform of the Security Council. Japan is a member of the G7, APEC, and "ASEAN Plus Three", and is a participant in the East Asia Summit. It is the world's fifth-largest donor of official development assistance, donating US$9.2 billion in 2014. In 2024, Japan had the fourth-largest diplomatic network in the world. Japan is widely considered to be a great power due to its economic power and political, cultural, and military influence.
Japan has close economic and military relations with the United States, with which it maintains a security alliance. The United States is a major market for Japanese exports and a major source of Japanese imports, and is committed to defending the country, with military bases in Japan. In 2016, Japan announced the Free and Open Indo-Pacific vision, which frames its regional policies. Japan is also a member of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue ("the Quad"), a multilateral security dialogue reformed in 2017 aiming to limit Chinese influence in the Indo-Pacific region, along with the United States, Australia, and India.
Japan is engaged in several territorial disputes with its neighbors. It contests Russia's control of the Southern Kuril Islands, which were occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945. South Korea's control of the Liancourt Rocks is acknowledged but not accepted as they are claimed by Japan. Japan's relations with China are marked by both deep economic ties as well as tensions over Taiwan, security, and the Senkaku Islands.

Military
Japan is the second highest-ranked Asian country in the 2025 Global Peace Index. It spent 1.4% of its total GDP on its defense budget and maintained the tenth-largest military budget in the world in 2025. The country's military, the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF), is restricted by Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution, which renounces Japan's right to declare war or use military force in international disputes. The military is governed by the Ministry of Defense, and primarily consists of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force, the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force, and the Japan Air Self-Defense Force. The deployment of troops to Iraq and Afghanistan marked the first overseas use of Japan's military since World War II.
The Government of Japan has been making changes to its security policy which include the establishment of the National Security Council, the adoption of the National Security Strategy, and the development of the National Defense Program Guidelines. In 2015, the Japanese parliament passed the Legislation for Peace and Security, allowing the JSDF to participate in foreign conflicts in an "existential crisis situation". In December 2022, Prime Minister Fumio Kishida instructed the government to increase spending by 65% until 2027. Recent tensions, particularly with North Korea and China, have reignited the debate over the status of the JSDF and its relation to Japanese society.

Law enforcement
Domestic security in Japan is provided mainly by the prefectural police departments, under the oversight of the National Police Agency. As the central coordinating body for the Prefectural Police Departments, the National Police Agency is administered by the National Public Safety Commission. The Special Assault Team comprises national-level counter-terrorism tactical units that cooperate with territorial-level Anti-Firearms Squads and Counter-NBC Terrorism Squads. The Japan Coast Guard guards territorial waters surrounding Japan and uses surveillance and control countermeasures against smuggling, marine environmental crime, poaching, piracy, spy ships, unauthorized foreign fishing vessels, and illegal immigration.
The Firearm and Sword Possession Control Law strictly regulates the civilian ownership of guns, swords, and other weaponry. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among the member states of the UN that report statistics as of 2018, the incidence rates of violent crimes such as murder, abduction, sexual violence, and robbery are very low in Japan.

Human rights
Japanese society traditionally places a strong emphasis on collective harmony and conformity, which has led to the suppression of individual rights. Japan's constitution prohibits racial and religious discrimination, and the country is a signatory to numerous international human rights treaties. However, it lacks any laws against discrimination based on race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity and does not have a national human rights institution.
Japan has faced criticism for its gender inequality, not allowing same-sex marriages, use of racial profiling by police, and allowing capital punishment. Other human rights issues include the treatment of marginalized groups, such as ethnic minorities, refugees and asylum seekers.

Economy
Japan has the world's fourth-largest economy by nominal GDP, after that of the United States, China and Germany; and the fifth-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP. As of 2023, Japan's labor force is the world's tenth-largest, consisting of over 69.2 million workers. As of 2024, Japan has a low unemployment rate of around 2.6%. Its poverty rate is the second highest among the G7 countries, and exceeds 15.7% of the population. Japan has the highest ratio of public debt to GDP among advanced economies, with a national debt estimated at 237% relative to GDP as of 2026. The Japanese yen is the world's third-largest reserve currency after the US dollar and the euro.
In 2024, Japan was the world's eight-largest exporter and sixth-largest importer. Its exports amounted to 22.8% of its total GDP in 2024. In 2025, Japan's main export markets were China (22.8%, including Hong Kong) and the United States (18.5%). Its main exports are motor vehicles, iron and steel products, semiconductors, and auto parts. Japan's main import markets in 2025 were China (23.8%) and the United States (11.4%). Japan's main imports are machinery and equipment, fossil fuels, foodstuffs, chemicals, and raw materials.
The Japanese variant of capitalism has many distinct features: keiretsu enterprises are influential, and lifetime employment and seniority-based career advancement are common in the Japanese work environment. Japan has a large cooperative sector, with three of the world's ten largest cooperatives, including the largest consumer cooperative and the largest agricultural cooperative as of 2018. It ranks highly for competitiveness and economic freedom. The country attracted 36.9 million international tourists in 2024, and was ranked eleventh in the world in 2019 for inbound tourism. The 2024 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Japan third in the world. Its international tourism receipts in 2019 amounted to $46.1 billion.

Agriculture and fishery
The Japanese agricultural sector accounts for about 1.2% of the country's total GDP as of 2018. Only 11.2% of Japan's land is suitable for cultivation. Because of this lack of arable land, a system of terraces is used to farm in small areas. This results in one of the world's highest levels of crop yields per unit area, with an agricultural self-sufficiency rate of about 50% as of 2018. Japan's small agricultural sector is highly subsidized and protected. There has been a growing concern about farming as farmers are aging with a difficult time finding successors.
Japan ranked seventh in the world in tonnage of fish caught and captured 3,167,610 metric tons of fish in 2016, down from an annual average of 4,000,000 tons over the previous decade. Japan maintains one of the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the global catch, prompting critiques that Japan's fishing is leading to depletion in fish stocks such as tuna. Japan has sparked controversy by supporting commercial whaling.

Industry and services
Japan has a large industrial capacity and is home to some of the "largest and most technologically advanced producers of motor vehicles, machine tools, steel and nonferrous metals, ships, chemical substances, textiles, and processed foods". Japan's industrial sector makes up approximately 27.5% of its GDP. The country's manufacturing output is the third highest in the world as of 2023.
Japan is in the top three globally for both automobile production and export, and is home to Toyota, the world's largest automobile company by production. The Japanese shipbuilding industry faces increasing competition from its East Asian neighbors, South Korea and China; a 2020 government initiative identified this sector as a target for increasing exports.
Once considered the strongest in the world, the Japanese consumer electronics industry is in a state of decline as regional competition arises in neighboring East Asian countries such as South Korea and China. However, Japan's video game sector remains a major industry; in 2014, Japan's consumer video game market grossed $9.6 billion, with $5.8 billion coming from mobile gaming. By 2015, Japan had become the world's fourth-largest PC game market by revenue, behind China, the United States, and South Korea.
Japan's service sector accounts for about 69.8% of its total economic output as of 2023. Banking, retail, transportation, and telecommunications are all major industries, with companies such as Toyota, Honda, Yamaha, Mitsubishi UFJ, NTT, Aeon, SoftBank, Hitachi, Mitsui, and Itochu listed as among the largest in the world.

Science and technology
Relative to gross domestic product, Japan's research and development budget is the sixth or seventh highest in the world, with 907,400 researchers sharing a 22-trillion-yen research and development budget as of 2023. Japan has the second highest number of researchers in science and technology per capita in the world with 14 per 1000 employees. The country has produced twenty-two Nobel laureates in either physics, chemistry or medicine, and three Fields medalists.
Japan is a leading robotics producer, supplying 38% of the world's 2024 total, down from 55% in 2017.
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency is Japan's national space agency; it conducts space, planetary, and aviation research, and leads development of rockets and satellites. It is a participant in the International Space Station: the Japanese Experiment Module (Kibō) was added to the station during Space Shuttle assembly flights in 2008. The space probe Akatsuki was launched in 2010 and achieved orbit around Venus in 2015. Japan's plans in space exploration include building a Moon base and landing astronauts by 2030. In 2007, it launched lunar explorer SELENE (Selenological and Engineering Explorer) from Tanegashima Space Center. The largest lunar mission since the Apollo program, its purpose was to gather data on the Moon's origin and evolution. The explorer entered a lunar orbit on October 4, 2007, and was deliberately crashed into the Moon on June 11, 2009.

Infrastructure
Transportation
Japan has invested heavily in transportation infrastructure since the 1990s. The country has approximately 1,200,000 kilometers (750,000 miles) of roads made up of 1,000,000 kilometers (620,000 miles) of city, town, and village roads, 130,000 kilometers (81,000 miles) of prefectural roads, 54,736 kilometers (34,011 miles) of general national highways, and 7641 kilometers (4748 miles) of national expressways as of 2017.
Since privatization in 1987, dozens of Japanese railway companies compete in regional and local passenger transportation markets; major companies include seven JR enterprises, Kintetsu, Seibu Railway and Keio Corporation. The high-speed Shinkansen (bullet trains) that connect major cities are known for their safety and punctuality.
There are 280 airports in Japan as of 2025. The largest domestic airport, Haneda Airport in Tokyo, was Asia's second-busiest airport in 2019. The Keihin and Hanshin superport hubs are among the largest in the world, at 7.98 and 5.22 million TEU respectively as of 2017.

Energy
As of 2019, 37.1% of energy in Japan is produced from petroleum, 25.1% from coal, 22.4% from natural gas, 3.5% from hydropower and 2.8% from nuclear power, among other sources. Nuclear power was down from 11.2% in 2010. By May 2012 all of the country's nuclear power plants had been taken offline because of ongoing public opposition following the Fukushima nuclear accident in March 2011, though government officials continued to try to sway public opinion in favor of returning at least some to service. The Sendai Nuclear Power Plant restarted in 2015, and since then several other nuclear power plants have been restarted. Japan lacks significant domestic reserves and has a heavy dependence on imported energy. The country has therefore aimed to diversify its sources and maintain high levels of energy efficiency.

Demographics
Japan has a population of nearly 123 million, of whom almost 119 million are Japanese nationals; foreign residents make up the remainder, estimated at 3,743,000 as of September 2025. Japan is one of the world's fastest aging countries and has the highest proportion of elderly citizens of any country, comprising one-third of its total population; this is the result of a post–World War II baby boom, which was followed by an increase in life expectancy and a decrease in birth rates.
Japan has a total fertility rate of 1.2, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and is among the world's lowest: it has a median age of 48.4, the highest in the world. As of 2025, over 29.3% of the population is over 65, or more than one in four out of the Japanese population. As a growing number of younger Japanese are not marrying or remaining childless, Japan's population is expected to drop to around 88 million by 2065.
The changes in demographic structure have created several social issues, particularly a decline in the workforce population and an increase in the cost of social security benefits. The Government of Japan projects that there will be almost one elderly person for each person of working age by 2060. Immigration and birth incentives are sometimes suggested as a solution to provide younger workers to support the nation's aging population. On April 1, 2019, Japan enacted its revised immigration law, protecting the rights of foreign workers to help reduce labor shortages in certain sectors.
In 2023, 92% of the Japanese population lived in cities. The capital city, Tokyo, has a population of 13.9 million (2022). It is part of the Greater Tokyo Area, the biggest metropolitan area in the world with 37.4 million people (2024). Japan is an ethnically and culturally homogeneous society, with the Japanese people forming 97.4% of the country's population. Minority ethnic groups in the country include the indigenous Ainu and Ryukyuan people. Zainichi Koreans, Chinese, Filipinos,  Brazilians mostly of Japanese descent, and  Peruvians mostly of Japanese descent are also among Japan's small minority groups. Burakumin make up a social minority group.

Languages
The Japanese language is Japan's de facto national language and the primary written and spoken language of most people in the country. Japanese writing uses kanji (Chinese characters) and two sets of kana (syllabaries based on cursive script and radicals used by kanji), as well as the Latin alphabet and Arabic numerals. English has taken a major role in Japan as a business and international link language, and is a compulsory subject at the junior and senior high school levels. Japanese Sign Language is the primary sign language used in Japan and has gained some official recognition, but its usage has been historically hindered by discriminatory policies and a lack of educational support.
Besides Japanese, the Ryukyuan languages (Amami, Kunigami, Okinawan, Miyako, Yaeyama, Yonaguni), part of the Japonic language family, are spoken in the Ryukyu Islands chain. The Hachijō variant, variably classified as a divergent dialect of Japanese or a separate Japonic language, is spoken on Hachijō-jima. Few children learn these languages, but local governments have sought to increase awareness of the traditional languages. The Ainu language, which is a language isolate, is moribund, with only a few native speakers remaining as of 2014. Additionally, a number of other languages are taught and used by ethnic minorities, immigrant communities, and a growing number of foreign-language students, such as Korean (including a distinct Zainichi Korean dialect), Chinese, and Portuguese.

Religion
Japan's consti­tu­tion guaran­tees full religious freedom. Upper estimates suggest that 84–96% of the Japanese population subscribe to Shinto as its indigenous religion. However, these estimates are based on people affiliated with a temple, rather than the number of true believers. Many Japanese people practice both Shinto and Buddhism; they can identify with both religions or describe themselves as non-religious or spiritual. The level of participation in religious ceremonies as a cultural tradition remains high, particularly during festivals and occasions such as the first shrine visit of the New Year. Taoism and Confucianism from China have also influenced Japanese beliefs and customs.
In 2018, 1% to 1.5% of the population were Christians. Throughout the latest century, Western customs originally related to Christianity, including Western style weddings, Valentine's Day and Christmas, have become popular as secular customs among many Japanese.
About 90% of those practicing Islam in Japan are foreign-born migrants as of 2016. In 2018, there were an estimated 105 mosques and 200,000 Muslims in Japan, 43,000 of which were Japanese nationals. Other minority religions include Hinduism, Judaism, and Baháʼí Faith, as well as the animist beliefs of the Ainu.

Education
Since the 1947 Fundamental Law of Education, compulsory education in Japan comprises elementary and junior high school, which together last for nine years. Almost all children continue their education at a three-year senior high school. The top-ranking university in Japan is the University of Tokyo. Starting in April 2016, various schools began the academic year with elementary school and junior high school integrated into one nine-year compulsory schooling program. MEXT plans for this approach to be adopted nationwide.
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) coordinated by the OECD ranks the knowledge and skills of Japanese 15-year-olds as the third best in the world. Japan is one of the top-performing OECD countries in reading literacy, math, and sciences with the average student scoring 520 and has one of the world's highest-educated labor forces among OECD countries. It spent 7.4% of its total GDP on education in 2021.
In 2023, Japan ranked third for the percentage of 25- to 64-year-olds that have attained tertiary education, at 56%. Approximately 65.5% of Japanese aged 25 to 34 have some form of tertiary education qualification, with bachelor's degrees being held by 34.8% of Japanese aged 25 to 64, the second most in the OECD after South Korea. Japanese women are more highly educated than the men: 59% of women possess a university degree, compared to 52% of men.

Health
Health care in Japan is provided by national and local governments. Payment for personal medical services is offered through a universal health insurance system that provides relative equality of access, with fees set by a government committee. People without insurance through employers can participate in a national health insurance program administered by local governments. Since 1973, all elderly persons have been covered by government-sponsored insurance.
Japan spent 11.42% of its total GDP on healthcare in 2022. In 2020, the overall life expectancy in Japan at birth was 85 years (82 years for men and 88 years for women), the highest in the world; while it had a very low infant mortality rate (2 per 1,000 live births). Since 1981, the principal cause of death in Japan is cancer, which accounted for 27% of the total deaths in 2018—followed by cardiovascular diseases, which led to 15% of the deaths. Japan has one of the world's highest suicide rates, which is considered a major social issue. Another significant public health issue is smoking among Japanese men. Japan has the lowest rate of heart disease in the OECD, and the lowest level of dementia among developed countries.

Culture
Contemporary Japanese culture combines influences from Asia, Europe, and North America. Traditional Japanese arts include crafts such as ceramics, textiles, lacquerware, swords, and dolls; performances of bunraku, kabuki, noh, dance, and rakugo; and other practices, the tea ceremony, ikebana, martial arts, calligraphy, origami, onsen, Geisha, and games. Japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible Cultural Properties and National Treasures. Twenty-two sites have been inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, eighteen of which are of cultural significance. Japan is considered a cultural superpower.

Art and architecture
The history of Japanese painting exhibits synthesis and competition between native Japanese esthetics and imported ideas. The interaction between Japanese and European art has been significant: for example ukiyo-e prints, which began to be exported in the 19th century in the movement known as Japonism, had a significant influence on the development of modern art in the West, most notably on post-Impressionism.
Japanese architecture is a combination of local and other influences. It has traditionally been typified by wooden or mud plaster structures, elevated slightly off the ground, with tiled or thatched roofs. Traditional housing and many temple buildings see the use of tatami mats and sliding doors that break down the distinction between rooms and indoor and outdoor space. Since the 19th century, Japan has incorporated much of Western modern architecture into construction and design. It was not until after World War II that Japanese architects made an impression on the international scene, firstly with the work of architects like Kenzō Tange and then with movements like Metabolism.

Literature and philosophy
The earliest works of Japanese literature include the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki chronicles and the Man'yōshū poetry anthology, all from the 8th century and written in Chinese characters. In the early Heian period, the system of phonograms known as kana (hiragana and katakana) was developed. The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is considered the oldest extant Japanese narrative. An account of court life is given in The Pillow Book by Sei Shōnagon, while The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu is often described as the world's first novel.
During the Edo period, the chōnin ('townspeople') overtook the samurai aristocracy as producers and consumers of literature. The popularity of the works of Saikaku, for example, reveals this change in readership and authorship, while Bashō revivified the poetic tradition of the Kokinshū with his haikai (haiku) and wrote the poetic travelogue Oku no Hosomichi. The Meiji era saw the decline of traditional literary forms as Japanese literature integrated Western influences. Natsume Sōseki and Mori Ōgai were significant novelists in the early 20th century, followed by Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, Jun'ichirō Tanizaki, Kafū Nagai and, more recently, Haruki Murakami and Kenji Nakagami. Japan has two Nobel Prize–winning authors—Yasunari Kawabata (1968) and Kenzaburō Ōe (1994).
Japanese philosophy has historically been a fusion of both foreign, particularly Chinese and Western, and uniquely Japanese elements. In its literary forms, Japanese philosophy began about fourteen centuries ago. Confucian ideals remain evident in the Japanese concept of society and the self, and in the organization of the government and the structure of society. Buddhism has profoundly impacted Japanese psychology, metaphysics, and esthetics.

Performing arts
Japanese music is eclectic and diverse. Many instruments, such as the koto, were introduced in the 9th and 10th centuries. The popular folk music, with the guitar-like shamisen, dates from the 16th century. Western classical music, introduced in the late 19th century, forms an integral part of Japanese culture. Kumi-daiko (ensemble drumming) was developed in post-war Japan and became very popular in North America. Popular music in post-war Japan has been heavily influenced by American and European trends, which has led to the evolution of J-pop. Karaoke is a significant cultural activity.
The four traditional theaters from Japan are noh, kyōgen, kabuki, and bunraku. Noh is one of the oldest continuous theater traditions in the world.

Media
According to the 2015 NHK survey on television viewing in Japan, 79% of Japanese watch television daily. Japanese television dramas are viewed both within Japan and internationally. Many Japanese media franchises have gained considerable global popularity and are among the world's highest-grossing media franchises. Japanese newspapers are among the most circulated in the world as of 2016.
Japan has one of the oldest and largest film industries globally. Ishirō Honda's Godzilla became an international icon of Japan and spawned an entire subgenre of kaiju films, as well as the longest-running film franchise in history. Japanese comics, known as manga, developed in the mid-20th century and have become popular worldwide. A large number of manga series have become some of the best-selling comics series of all time, rivalling the American comics industry. Japanese animated films and television series, known as anime, were largely influenced by Japanese manga and have become highly popular globally.
The World Press Freedom Index reported self-censorship among journalists.

Holidays
Officially, Japan has 16 national, government-recognized holidays. Public holidays in Japan are regulated by the Public Holiday Law (国民の祝日に関する法律, Kokumin no Shukujitsu ni Kansuru Hōritsu) of 1948. Beginning in 2000, Japan implemented the Happy Monday System, which moved a number of national holidays to Monday in order to obtain a long weekend. The national holidays in Japan are New Year's Day on January 1, Coming of Age Day on the second Monday of January, National Foundation Day on February 11, The Emperor's Birthday on February 23, Vernal Equinox Day on March 20 or 21, Shōwa Day on April 29, Constitution Memorial Day on May 3, Greenery Day on May 4, Children's Day on May 5, Marine Day on the third Monday of July, Mountain Day on August 11, Respect for the Aged Day on the third Monday of September, Autumnal Equinox on September 23 or 24, Health and Sports Day on the second Monday of October, Culture Day on November 3, and Labor Thanksgiving Day on November 23.

Cuisine
Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients. Seafood and Japanese rice or noodles are traditional staples. Japanese curry, since its introduction to Japan from British India, is so widely consumed that it can be termed a national dish, alongside ramen and sushi. Traditional Japanese sweets are known as wagashi. Ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used. More modern-day tastes include green tea ice cream.
Popular Japanese beverages include sake, a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 14–17% alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice. Beer has been brewed in Japan since the late 17th century. Green tea is produced in Japan and prepared in forms such as matcha, used in the Japanese tea ceremony.

Sports
Traditionally, sumo is considered Japan's national sport. Japanese martial arts such as judo and kendo are taught as part of the compulsory junior high school curriculum. Karate, which originated in the Ryukyu Kingdom, is popular across the world and has been included in the Olympic Games. Baseball is the most popular sport in the country. Japan's top professional league, Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB), was established in 1936. Since the establishment of the Japan Professional Football League (J.League) in 1992, association football gained a wide following. The country co-hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup with South Korea. Japan has one of the most successful football teams in Asia, winning the Asian Cup four times, and the FIFA Women's World Cup in 2011. Golf is also popular in Japan.
In motorsport, Japanese automotive manufacturers have been successful in multiple different categories, with titles and victories in series such as Formula One, MotoGP, and the World Rally Championship. Drivers from Japan have victories at the Indianapolis 500 and the 24 Hours of Le Mans as well as podium finishes in Formula One, in addition to success in domestic championships. Super GT is the most popular national racing series in Japan, while Super Formula is the top-level domestic open-wheel series. The country hosts major races such as the Japanese Grand Prix.
Japan hosted the Summer Olympics in Tokyo in 1964 and the Winter Olympics in Sapporo in 1972 and Nagano in 1998. The country hosted the official 2006 Basketball World Championship and co-hosted the 2023 Basketball World Championship. Tokyo hosted the 2020 Summer Olympics in 2021, making Tokyo the first Asian city to host the Olympics twice. The country gained the hosting rights for the official Women's Volleyball World Championship on five occasions, more than any other country. Japan is the most successful Asian Rugby Union country and hosted the 2019 IRB Rugby World Cup.

See also
Index of Japan-related articles
Outline of Japan

Notes
References
External links

Government

JapanGov – The Government of Japan
Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet Official website
The Imperial Household Agency – official site of the Imperial House of Japan
National Diet Library
General information

Japan from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived April 21, 2009)
Japan from BBC News
Japan from the OECD
 Geographic data related to Japan at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Japan
Tourism in Japan is a major industry and contributor to the Japanese economy. In 2025, the number of international tourists visiting Japan was 42.7 million. The total number of domestic tourists in Japan, including day trips, reached 540 million in 2024, while total tourism consumption within the country amounted the same year to 34.3 trillion yen ($237 billion), accounting for 5.6% of the country’s GDP of 609 trillion yen ($4,208 billion). As of 2023, it is the world's fourth-largest travel and tourism market.
Japan's most visited prefectures are Tokyo, Osaka, Chiba, Kyoto and Fukuoka.
Among the most popular sites are Sensoji temple (Tokyo), Nikkô, the Fushimi Inari shrine or the Kinkakuji in Kyoto. Japan has 26 World Heritage Sites, including Himeji Castle and the Historic Monuments of Ancient Kyoto and Nara. 
The 2024 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Japan 3rd out of 141 countries overall, which was the highest in Asia. Japan gained relatively high scores in almost all of the featured aspects, such as health and hygiene, safety and security, cultural resources and business travel.
Tourism is also at the heart of a debate in Japan, where there is growing frustration with the influx of visitors. The term "overtourism" is being used to describe this phenomenon.

History
From the middle ages to early modern period
In medieval Japan, travel became increasingly common with cultural and aristocratic figures from Kyoto, and they initiated the genre of travel literature in Japan. Notable examples of travel literature from this period include the Tosa Nikki (935), part of the Sarashina Nikki (12th century), and the volume 4 of the Tohazugatari (1313). By the late medieval period, supported by a network of inns offering fixed-rate lodging and meals, travel was widespread. Hot springs such as Kusatsu, Arima, and Gero gained fame, attracting notable figures such as warriors and monks. Tourist souvenirs including ladles and toothpicks were popular among visitors. Pilgrimages to Mount Fuji also flourished.

During the Edo period, despite restrictions on travelling through checkpoints, guidebooks facilitated the popularisation of travel. Commoners with permits could undertake leisure trips, often disguised as pilgrimages. Inns, teahouses, and local products thrived, and travel information spread via diaries and ukiyo-e prints. Pilgrimages such as the Ise Grand Shrine’s Okage Mairi became major social phenomena, marking the beginnings of a modern tourism industry. However, foreign travel was extremely rare due to Japan's isolation policy. Matsuo Bashō's 1689 trip to the then "far north" of Japan, which inspired his famous haibun work Oku no Hosomichi, occurred not long after Hayashi Razan categorized the Three Views of Japan in 1643. During this time, Japan was a closed country to foreigners, so no foreign tourism existed in Japan.

Meiji era and international tourism
Japan opened its borders in the late Edo period, but due to its location in the Far East and the limited transport options, there were not many foreign visitors. Foreigners eventually gained the freedom to travel within Japan, and efforts to actively attract international tourists began on the Japanese side. In 1912, the Japan Travel Bureau (JTB) was established. Another major milestone in the development of the tourism industry in Japan was the 1907 passage of the Hotel Development Law, as a result of which the Railways Ministry began to construct publicly owned hotels throughout Japan. During the interwar period, overseas travel to distant places such as Europe and the Americas was primarily limited to businesspeople, immigrants, and students, with leisure travel being mostly reserved for the wealthy.
In terms of domestic tourism, the dismantling of the feudal system, the development of transport networks such as railways and steamships, and the spread of information made domestic travel easier. Tourism-oriented travel became increasingly popular, and regions across Japan began developing themselves for sightseeing and leisure purposes. Long-distance domestic travel became accessible.
In 1930, the Japanese Government Railways created the Board of Tourist Industry (国際観光局, Kokusai Kankō Kyoku) with the specific goal of attracting foreign tourists to Japan. In addition to supporting the development of resort hotels, the Board was responsible for designing and printing posters and foreign-language guidebooks for distribution overseas. Due to the Pacific War, the Board was abolished in 1942.

Postwar period
During the postwar Allied occupation period, most foreign tourists in Japan were GHQ personnel or visitors from the United States. In 1954, Konosuke Matsushita, the founder of Panasonic, contributed an article titled The Case for a Tourism-Oriented Nation to the Bungei Shunju. Matsushita argued that tourism could be considered a form of trade, and he pointed out that while exporting goods involves depleting Japan's resources, scenic attractions such as Mount Fuji and the Seto Inland Sea remain unchanged no matter how often they are viewed. He proposed that revenue earned through inbound tourism could be reinvested in other industries, and help rebuild the country's economy beyond its pre-war stature.

For much of post-war period, Japan has been an exceptionally unattractive tourist destination for its population and GDP size. From 1995 to 2014, Japan was by far the least visited G7 country, and typically ranked below smaller countries like Sweden in total numbers As of 2013, Japan was one of the least visited countries in the OECD on a per capita basis. Japan avoided campaigns to attract inbound tourists, especially because its large current account surplus had caused international friction with some countries. There were also factors such as Japan being among the world's most expensive countries at the time (for example, Tokyo was rated by the Economist Intelligence Unit as the most expensive city in the world for 14 years in a row ending in 2006), as well as the language barrier.

Active promotion of inbound tourism (21st century)
From 2013, under the Abe administration, policies to attract international tourists were implemented to offset the shrinking domestic demand caused by population decline and ageing. As a result, by 2014, for the first time in 55 years, income from foreign tourists exceeded the amount spent by Japanese tourists abroad, which means Japan finally ran a tourism surplus. Within six years, the number of international visitors has more than tripled, reaching 31.9 million visitors in 2019. Japan received a record 36.87 million tourist arrivals in 2024, an increase of over 47% from the year prior.

Current status
Domestic tourism remains a vital part of Japanese economy and Japanese culture. Across the nation, Japanese children in many middle schools see the highlight of their years as a visit to Tokyo Tower, Yomiuriland, Tokyo Disneyland, Sensō-ji, and/or Tokyo Skytree, and many high school students often visit Okinawa or Hokkaido. The extensive rail network together with domestic flights sometimes in planes with modifications to favor the relatively short distances involved in intra-Japan travel allows efficient and speedy transport. International tourism plays a smaller role in the Japanese economy compared to other developed countries; in 2013, international tourist receipts was 0.3% of Japan's GDP, while the corresponding figure was 1.3% for the United States and 2.3% for France. In 2019, the value was up to 1.0% of GDP, driven by an increase in international tourism, while the country's GDP has remained stable.
From a statistical perspective, spending by international tourists in Japan is classified as exports. As a result, the inbound tourism industry ranks as the second-largest export industry after the automobile industry, which recorded 17.7 trillion yen ($122 billion) in export value. In 2025, domestic tourism spending by Japanese nationals, the number of international tourists, and the total tourism spending by international visitors all reached record highs.
Tourists from South Korea have made up the largest number of inbound tourists several times in the past. In 2010, their 2.4 million arrivals made up 27% of the tourists visiting Japan. Travelers from China have been the highest spenders in Japan by country, spending an estimated 196.4 billion yen (US$2.4 billion) in 2011, or almost a quarter of total expenditure by foreign visitors, according to data from the Japan Tourism Agency. From 2016 to 2020, Japanese government hoped to receive 40 million foreign tourists every year by 2020. According to the Japan National Tourism Organization in 2017, 3 out of 4 foreign tourists came from other parts of East Asia, namely South Korea, mainland China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. 
The worldwide popularity of Japanese popular culture significantly drives tourism to Japan. Anime, manga, J-pop, cinema, video games, cuisine and other cultural facets have created a strong "soft power" appeal that draws millions of fans and tourists from around the globe to the country.

Overtourism
Following the easing of COVID-19-era travel restrictions, 2024 is on track to be a record-breaking year for the number of overseas tourists. This tourism boom can be attributed in part to the weakening Japanese yen. The unprecedented number of foreign tourists has led to claims that some parts of Japan are suffering from overtourism. In response to this surge, officials in some parts of Japan have introduced measures to counter its negative effects. For example, Yamanashi Prefecture has set a cap of daily climbers of Mount Fuji at 4,000 people and began charging an entrance fee of ¥2,000. Also in Yamanashi Prefecture, a mesh barrier was set up to block a view of Mount Fuji behind a Lawson convenience store in Fujikawaguchiko due to tourist-caused disturbances in the area. As of 2024, some Japanese officials have considered instituting a two-tiered pricing system which would have foreign tourists pay more than residents at certain tourist attractions in order to counter the effects of overtourism.

Motivation for visiting Japan
International Tourists: Foreign visitors travel to Japan for its seasonal beauty, cuisine, history, culture, manga and anime. 
Domestic Tourists: Japanese domestic travelers are  motivated by seasonal events, relaxation, and the desire to get out of the city. Many do short trips to hot springs, nature spots, or historical towns.

Tourism statistics
These are the top 35 nationalities that visited Japan from 2018 to 2025:

Major tourist destinations
Hokkaido
Niseko Ski Resort
Shiretoko Peninsula (WHS)
Teshikaga – Lake Mashū, Lake Kussharo
Tōya Caldera and Mount Usu Geopark
Daisetsuzan Volcanic Group
Hakodate
Otaru

Tōhoku region
Shirakami-Sanchi (WHS)
Mount Osore
Lake Towada
Hirosaki – Hirosaki Castle, Nakacho Samurai District
Hiraizumi – Chūson-ji, Mōtsū-ji, Kanjizaiō-in, Takkoku-no-Iwaya
Semboku – Kakunodate Samurai District, Lake Tazawa, Nyūtō Onsen
Yamagata – Yama-dera Temple, Zaō Onsen
Matsushima

Kantō region
Nikkō – Shrines and Temples of Nikkō (WHS), Kegon Falls, Lake Chūzenji, Cedar Avenue of Nikko
Tomioka Silk Mill (WHS)
Kinugawa Onsen – Edo Wonderland Nikko Edomura, Tobu World Square
Utsunomiya – Oya stone museum, Utsunomiya Futarayama Shrine
Ashikaga, Tochigi – Ashikaga Gakkō, Ashikaga Flower Park
Tokyo – Imperial Palace, Asakusa, Akihabara, Ginza, Harajuku/Omotesandō, Nakano Broadway, Shibuya, Shinjuku, Tsukiji Fish Market, Ueno Park, Fujiko F. Fujio Museum, Studio Ghibli Museum
Tokyo Disney Resort
Kamakura – Tsurugaoka Hachiman-gū, Kōtoku-in, Kenchō-ji, Engaku-ji, Meigetsu-in, Hase-dera
Kusatsu Onsen
Hakone Onsen

Chūbu region
Mount Fuji
Japanese Alps – Tateyama Kurobe Alpine Route(Mount Tate), Hida Mountains, Kiso Mountains, Akaishi Mountains
Kurobe Gorge Railway
Shiga Kōgen
Matsumoto – Matsumoto Castle, Mount Hotaka, Kamikōchi
Shirakawa-gō and Gokayama (WHS)
Takayama – Sanmachi Traditional Street, Ōshinmachi Traditional Street, Higashiyama Temple Area
Kanazawa – Kenroku-en Garden, Kanazawa Castle, Higashi Geisha District, Nagamachi Samurai District
Sakai – Tōjinbō, Maruoka Castle
Nagoya – Nagoya Castle, Atsuta Shrine, Sakae, Nagoya Station (Meieki), Ōsu Kannon temple

Kansai region
Kyoto – Kinkaku-ji, Ginkaku-ji, Kiyomizu-dera, Ryōan-ji, Sanjūsangen-dō, etc., they are parts of Historic Monuments of Ancient Kyoto (WHS)
Uji – Byōdō-in and Ujigami Shrine (WHS), Relation of The Tale of Genji
Ōtsu – Lake Biwa, Hiyoshi Taisha, Sakamoto Temple District, Mount Hiei, Enryaku-ji (WHS)
Ōmihachiman – Traditional Riverside District
Nara – Tōdai-ji, Tōshōdai-ji, Kōfuku-ji, Yakushi-ji, Heijō Palace, Kasuga-taisha and Nara Park, etc. They are parts of the Historic Monuments of Ancient Nara (WHS).
Ikaruga – Hōryū-ji and Hōki-ji are Buddhist Monuments in the Hōryū-ji Area (WHS).
Yoshino (Mount Yoshino) – Kimpusen-ji, Yoshimizu Shrine, Yoshino Mikumari Shrine, etc. They are parts of the Sacred Sites and Pilgrimage Routes in the Kii Mountain Range (WHS).
Shingū – Kumano Hayatama Taisha and Kumano River (WHS)
Nachikatsuura – Nachi Falls, Kumano Kodō, etc., they are parts of Sacred Sites and Pilgrimage Routes in the Kii Mountain Range (WHS)
Mount Kōya – Kongōbu-ji (WHS)
Osaka – Osaka Castle, Umeda, Namba, Dōtonbori, Shinsaibashi, Shinsekai, Shitennō-ji, Sumiyoshi-taisha, Universal Studios Japan, Kaiyukan, Rinku Town, Den-Den Town, Expo Commemoration Park, Kamagasaki
Himeji – Engyō-ji, Koko-en Garden, and Himeji Castle (WHS)
Kobe – Port of Kobe, Rokkō Mountains, Kitano-chō, Arima Onsen, Kobe Luminarie
San'in Kaigan Geopark – Toyooka, Izushi, Kinosaki Onsen, Yumura Onsen

Chūgoku region
Hiroshima Prefecture – Itsukushima Shrine (WHS), Onomichi, Tomonoura
Okayama Prefecture – Kurashiki, Kōrakuen Garden, Okayama Castle
Tottori Prefecture – Tottori Sand Dunes, Mount Daisen, Mount Hyōno, San'in Kaigan Geopark
Shimane Prefecture – Iwami Ginzan Silver Mine (WHS), Izumo-taisha, Matsue Castle, Oki Islands, Tsuwano
Yamaguchi Prefecture – Hagi

Shikoku
Shikoku Pilgrimage (Zentsū-ji, Motoyama-ji, etc.)
Ehime Prefecture – Dōgo Onsen, Matsuyama Castle
Kagawa Prefecture – Kotohira-gū Shrine, Ritsurin Garden, Shōdo Island, Naoshima Island
Tokushima Prefecture – Naruto whirlpools, Awa Dance Festival in Tokushima
Kōchi Prefecture – Kōchi Castle, Cape Muroto (Muroto Geopark), Cape Ashizuri

Kyushu and Okinawa
Fukuoka Prefecture – Mojiko Retro Town, Kokura Castle, Dazaifu Tenman-gū, Remains of Dazaifu (government)
Ōita Prefecture – Many types of hot springs in Beppu, Ōita or Yufuin, Ōita, Usa jingū, stone bridges, small stonehenge on the top of Komekamiyama (mountain), Hello Kitty Harmonyland
Nagasaki Prefecture – Ōura Church, Higashi-Yamate, Minami-Yamate including the Glover Garden, Huis Ten Bosch (theme park), Hidden Christian Sites (WHS)
Kagoshima Prefecture – Yakushima (WHS), Sakurajima, Amami Ōshima
Miyazaki Prefecture – Kirishima-Yaku National Park, Takachiho, Old Exculibur on the top of Takachiho-kyo mountain, Nichinan, Miyazaki,　Chambered barrows of Saitobaru kofungun, Heiwadai Park
Kumamoto Prefecture – Kumamoto Castle,　Mount Aso
Saga Prefecture –  Pre-400 BC Yayoi archaeological site in Yoshinogari site
Okinawa Prefecture – Shuri Castle, Nakagusuku Castle, Nakijin Castle, etc. They are parts of the Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu. (WHS), Ishigaki Island, Miyako Island, Iriomote Island, Traditional Ryukyuan Houses in Taketomi Island

See also
Groups of Traditional Buildings
Japanese museums
List of National Geoparks in Japan
List of Special Places of Scenic Beauty, Special Historic Sites and Special Natural Monuments
World Heritage Sites in Japan
List of museums in Japan
National Treasures of Japan
Omiyage
Ryokan (Japanese inn)
Visa policy of Japan

References
Further reading
Graburn, Nelson HH. "The past in the present in Japan: nostalgia and neo-traditionalism in contemporary Japanese domestic tourism." in Change in tourism: people, places, processes (1995): 47–70.
Henderson, Joan Catherine. "Destination development: Trends in Japan's inbound tourism." International Journal of Tourism Research 19.1 (2017): 89–98. online
Ishimori, Shûzô. "Popularization and commercialization of tourism in early modern Japan." Senri Ethnological Studies 26 (1989): 179–194. online
Jimura, Takamitsu. Cultural heritage and tourism in Japan (Routledge, 2021) online.
McOmie, William, ed. Foreign Images and Experiences of Japan: 1: First Century AD-1841. (Brill, 2021). online
March, Roger. "How Japan solicited the West: the first hundred years of modern Japanese tourism." in CAUTHE 2007: Tourism-Past Achievements, Future Challenges (2007): 843–52. online
Robertson, Jennifer. "Hegemonic nostalgia, tourism, and nation-making in Japan." Senri ethnological studies 38 (1995): 89–103. online
Soshiroda, Akira. "Inbound tourism policies in Japan from 1859 to 2003." Annals of Tourism Research 32.4 (2005): 1100–1120.
Takeuchi, Keiichi. "Some remarks on the geography of tourism in Japan." GeoJournal (1984): 85–90. online
Tokuhisa, Tamao. "Tourism within, from and to Japan." International Social Science Journal 32.1 (1980): 128–150.
Uzama, Austin. "Yokoso! Japan: Classifying foreign tourists to Japan for market segmentation." Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management 21.2 (2012): 132–154.
Yanagi, Miyuki. "Reconsideration of Japan's tourism innovation characteristics." Geographical Research Bulletin 2 (2023): 29–38. online
Yasuda, Hiroko. "World heritage and cultural tourism in Japan." International Journal of Culture, Tourism and Hospitality Research 4.4 (2010): 366–375.

External links

Japan National Tourist Organization
JapanTourist Travel Articles Database Archived May 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine
2018 Foreign Visitors & Japanese Departures

## Culture of Japan
Japanese culture has changed greatly over the millennia, from the country's prehistoric Jōmon period, to its contemporary modern culture, which absorbs influences from Asia and other regions of the world.
Since the Jomon period, ancestral groups like the Yayoi and Kofun, who arrived to Japan from Korea and China, respectively, have shaped Japanese culture. Rice cultivation and centralized leadership were introduced by these groups, shaping Japanese culture. Chinese dynasties, particularly the Tang dynasty, have influenced Japanese culture throughout history and brought it into the Sinosphere. After 220 years of isolation, the Meiji era opened Japan to Western influences, enriching and diversifying Japanese culture. Popular culture shows how much contemporary Japanese culture influences the world. As of 2023, Japan's overseas exports of cultural content recorded 5,776.9 billion yen.

Identity
There are two competing hypotheses that try to explain the lineage of the Japanese people.
The first hypothesis proposes a dual-structure model, in which Japanese populations are descendants of the indigenous Jōmon people and later arrivals of people from the East Eurasian continent, known as the Yayoi people. Japan's indigenous culture originates primarily from the Yayoi people who settled in Japan between 1000 BCE and 300 CE. Yayoi culture spread to the main island of Honshu, mixing with the native Jōmon culture. Modern Japanese have an estimated 80% Yayoi and 20% Jōmon ancestry.
The second hypothesis proposes a tripartite model of genomic origin. This hypothesis proposes that contemporary Japanese people are from three distinct ancestral groups: Jōmon, Yayoi and Kofun, with 13%, 16% and 71% of genetic ancestry, respectively. During the Kofun period, it is said that migrant groups from China came to Japan and settled on the island, bringing with them various cultural advances and centralized leadership. The migrants who came to Japan during the Kofun period appear to have had ancestry that mainly resembles the ancestry of the Han Chinese population of China. The Jomon people were hunter-gathers; the Yayoi people introduced rice cultivation; and the Kofun migrants introduced imperial state formation.
Japanese culture was influenced from ancient times to the Middle Ages primarily by multiple Chinese dynasties, with substantial derivation from the Tang dynasty, and to a lesser extent by other Asian countries. For example, one of the scripts for writing in the Japanese language is Chinese characters (kanji), but Japanese has no genetic relationship with Chinese. Since the Meiji era, Japan has been primarily influenced by Western countries.
During the Tokugawa shogunate, the inhabitants of Japan experienced over 220 years of relative isolation from the outside world until the arrival of the Black Ships precipitated the Meiji Restoration and subsequent Meiji era.
Today, the culture of Japan stands as one of the most influential cultures around the world, mainly because of the global reach of its popular culture. In 2023, U.S. News & World Report ranked Japan's cultural influence as the highest in Asia and 4th worldwide.

Language
Japanese is the national and primary language of Japan. The language is a lexically distinct pitch-accent system. Early Japanese is known primarily by its state in the 8th century when the three major works of Old Japanese were compiled. The earliest attestation of the Japanese language was found in a Chinese document from 256 CE. However, the Japanese language has no genetic relationship with Chinese, nor any clear affiliation with any other language. While there are a number of theories about the origins of Japanese, the strongest arguments for affiliation are with Korean on the basis of similar syntax. More controversially, it has also been paired with Altaic languages due to a similar number of systems and verb forms. While Japanese is the only official language of Japan, other languages such as Ainu and Ryukyuan are spoken on the Japanese islands.
Written Japanese uses a combination of three scripts: Chinese characters pronounced as "kanji" (漢字) in Japanese, hiragana, and katakana. Japan had no writing system prior to adopting kanji from China in 751 CE, and like Chinese, kanji are used extensively in Japanese as logograms. Presently, there is a notable number of kanji in modern Japanese with a different meaning from the corresponding hanzi character used in modern Chinese. Modern Japanese also features far fewer simplified Chinese characters in comparison to modern Chinese as Japanese typically uses fewer kanji, mainly for nouns, adjective stems, and verb stems. Both hiragana and katakana are phonetic syllabaries derived from man'yōgana, a phonetic Chinese characters originating in the 5th century and maturing in the 8th. Hiragana and katakana were developed from simplified kanji; hiragana emerged somewhere around the 9th century. Women used hiragana informally, while men used katakana formally. By the 10th century, both systems were common.
Japanese vocabulary consists of 49% words of Chinese origin, 33% words of Japanese origin, and 18% loanwords from other languages, including European languages, words of mixed origin, and the made-in-Japan pseudo-English known as wasei-eigo. The Latin alphabet is often used in modern Japanese, especially for company names, logos, advertising, and when inputting Japanese into a computer. The Hindu–Arabic numerals are often used for numbers and can be read in either Japanese or English, but traditional Sino–Japanese numerals are also common. The influence of Japanese culture in the Western world over the past few centuries has led to many of its terms, such as origami, tsunami, karaoke, and pop cultural terms like shonen and shōjo being incorporated into the English language. Words like these have also been added to the Oxford English Dictionary.

Religion
Shinto and Buddhism are the primary religions of Japan. According to the annual statistical research on religion in 2018 by the Government of Japan's Agency for Culture Affairs, 66.7 percent of the population practices Buddhism, 25.6 percent practices Shintoism, 7.7 percent other religions. According to the annual statistical research on religion in 2018 by the Government of Japan's Agency for Culture Affairs, about two million or around 1.5% of Japan's population are Christians. Other religions include Islam (70,000) and Judaism (2,000), which are largely immigrant communities with some ethnic Japanese practitioners.

Shinto
Shinto is an ethnic religion focusing on ceremonies and rituals. In Shinto, followers believe that kami – Shinto deities or spirits – are present throughout nature, including rocks, trees, and mountains. Humans can also be considered to possess a kami. One of the goals of Shinto is to maintain or strengthen the connection between humans, nature, and kami. The religion developed in Japan prior to the 6th century CE, after which point followers built shrines to worship kami.

Buddhism
Buddhism developed in India around the 6th and 4th centuries BCE and eventually spread through the Sinosphere and South East Asia. It arrived in Japan during the 6th century CE, where it was initially unpopular. Most Japanese people were unable to understand the difficult philosophical messages present in Buddhism; however, an appreciation for the religion's art and its close relation to China led to Buddhism growing in popularity by the 8th century.

Christianity
Christianity was introduced in the 16th century. When the religion was banned during the 17th century, a group of hidden Christians blended Christian theology with Shinto and Buddhist practices. Hidden Christian Sites in the Nagasaki Region have become World Heritage Sites, and the unique style of Christian art is now recognized.
Despite being a minority religion in Japan, Christian chapel marriage ceremonies are a popular wedding style in Japan.

Islam
A minority of Japanese are Muslims. Cultural differences and a predominantly non-Muslim society present unique challenges for Japan's Muslim community, mostly immigrants from Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Iran.
Muslims are scattered in Japan. Mosques and halal food are scarce due to their dispersion. Family-linked long-term residents are assimilating into Japanese society despite language and cultural barriers. Analysts say the small Muslim community and cultural differences between Islam and Japan reduce future conflicts. Syncretic Sufi Islam may increase Japan's Muslim population.

National character
The Japanese "national character" has been written about under the term Nihonjinron, literally meaning 'theories/discussions about the Japanese people' and referring to texts on matters that are normally the concerns of sociology, psychology, history, linguistics, and philosophy, but emphasizing the authors' assumptions or perceptions of Japanese exceptionalism; these are predominantly written in Japan by Japanese people, though examples have also been written by foreign residents, journalists and even scholars.

Literature
Early works of Japanese literature were heavily influenced by cultural contact with the Chinese Empire and Classical Chinese literature, often written in Classical Chinese (Kanbun) or utilizing Chinese characters for their phonetic properties. Eventually, classical Japanese literature developed into a distinct aesthetic style in its own right as court writers began utilizing unique phonetic syllabaries, particularly Hiragana, to compose native works like waka poetry and prose narratives. The Tale of Genji, written by the court lady Murasaki Shikibu during the peak of the Heian period, is recognized worldwide as a masterpiece of unique Japanese vernacular prose and is frequently cited as the world's first psychological novel. Since the Bakumatsu era, when the island nation reopened its treaty ports to Western maritime trade and diplomacy in the 19th century, Western and Eastern literary movements such as naturalism, realism, and modernist prose, have strongly affected each other through cross-cultural translations and continue to do so in contemporary global comparative literature.

Visual arts
Japanese calligraphy (書道, shodō, "the way of writing") is a traditional Japanese art and East Asian calligraphic discipline. Japanese calligraphers use the traditional Four Treasures of the Study: brush, ink, paper, and inkstone, to write kanji and kana.  Several different styles of Japanese calligraphy exist, with considerable effort put into the outcome; in some cases, it can take over one hundred attempts to produce the desired result of a single character. This form of calligraphy is known as shodō (書道), literally meaning 'the way of writing or calligraphy', or more commonly, shūji (習字), 'learning how to write characters'. Commonly confused with calligraphy is the art form of sumi-e (墨絵), literally meaning 'ink painting', which is the art of painting a scene or object using diluted black ink. Japanese terminology distinguishes shodō (書道) from shūji (習字) and shosha (書写). Shodō presents calligraphy as a cultivated artistic path within Japanese aesthetics and the broader culture of dō arts, while shūji and shosha usually refer to school instruction in handwriting, character formation, and brush practice.
Painting has been an art in Japan for a very long time: the brush is a traditional writing and painting tool, and the extension of that to its use as an artist's tool was probably natural. Japanese painters are often categorized by what they painted, as most of them constrained themselves solely to subjects such as animals, landscapes, or figures. Chinese papermaking was introduced to Japan around the 7th century. Later, washi was developed from it. Native Japanese painting techniques are still in use today, as well as techniques adopted from continental Asia and from the West. Schools of painting such as the Kano school of the 16th century became known for their bold brush strokes and contrast between light and dark, especially after Oda Nobunaga and Tokugawa Ieyasu began to use this style. Famous Japanese painters include Kanō Sanraku, Maruyama Ōkyo, and Tani Bunchō.
Ukiyo-e, literally means 'pictures of the floating world', is a genre of woodblock prints that exemplifies the characteristics of pre-Meiji Japanese art. Because these prints could be mass-produced, they were available to a wide cross-section of the Japanese populace – those not wealthy enough to afford original paintings – during their heyday, from the 17th to 20th century.
Japanese lacquerware and ceramics have historically gained international fame, and lacquerware has been actively exported since the Muromachi period and ceramics since the Edo period. Japanese crafts became known in Europe after the Nanban trade and inspired the enconchado technique of inlaid art in colonial Mexico.
Ikebana is the Japanese art of flower arrangement. It has gained widespread international fame for its focus on harmony, color use, rhythm, and elegantly simple design. It is an art centered greatly on expressing the seasons and is meant to act as a symbol to something greater than the flower itself.

Traditional clothing
The kimono is the national garment of Japan, having developed from Chinese court clothing in the Nara period following the exchange of diplomatic envoys between the two countries at that time. The word kimono translates literally as 'thing to wear on the shoulders'; however, this term developed some time around the Edo period, before which most kimono-like garments were referred to as the kosode ('short sleeve'), with longer-sleeved garments being known as furisode ('swinging sleeve').
The earliest versions of the kimono were heavily influenced by traditional Chinese clothing, known today as hanfu (kanfuku (漢服) in Japanese). This influence was spread through Japanese envoy missions to China, resulting in extensive Chinese cultural adoption by Japan as early as the 5th century CE. It was during the 8th century, however, that Chinese fashions came fully into style, and following the cancellation of the 20th mission to Tang dynasty China, these fashions developed independently, with the overlapping, V-shaped collar becoming women's fashion and the precursor to the modern kimono.
Kimono, alongside all other items of traditional Japanese clothing, are known collectively as wafuku, meaning 'Japanese clothing', as opposed to yōfuku, Western-style clothing. Kimono come in a variety of colors, styles, and sizes. Men mainly wear darker or more muted colors, while women tend to wear brighter colors and pastels, and, especially for younger women, often with complicated abstract or floral patterns.
In previous decades, married women wore short sleeved kimono, whereas unmarried women wore long sleeved kimono to both formal and informal occasions; however, the rise in both the average age of marriage and the numbers of women never marrying in Japan has led to the divide between sleeve length becoming one more of age, with most women in their early twenties wearing long sleeved kimono only to formal occasions, and most women past their early twenties wearing short sleeved kimono to formal events, regardless of marriage status. Other developments include the abandoning of layered kimono and the standardisation of the length of short sleeved women's kimono to a range of roughly 49–52 centimetres (19–20 in) in length, both developments driven by fabric shortages in WWII.
The happi coat is another form of traditional clothing. A happi (commonly Anglicised as "happy") coat is a straight sleeved coat typically decorated with a family crest and/or kanji along the collar. In previous centuries, happi-style coats known as hikeshi sashiko banten or simply hikeshi banten were commonly worn by firefighters; the coats would be constructed from several layers of heavy cotton stitched together, and would be soaked in water to provide protection from fire.
Alongside traditional clothing, Japan also has distinct footwear; tabi, ankle-length split-toed socks, are commonly worn with the kimono, and are designed to be worn with traditional shoes such as geta and zōri. Geta are thonged sandals mounted on wooden blocks extending from the base of the shoe to the floor, and are worn by men and women with kimono or yukata; zōri are flat-based or sloping sandals made of a number of different materials, and are considered to be more formal than geta.
Fashion trends and consumer apathy have hurt the Japanese kimono industry. Kimono sales and traditional tailors suffered after WWII due to Western fashion. Innovative and diverse kimono makers have revived the declining industry. Internationally, the industry has tried casual styles. The Boston Museum of Fine Arts' "Kimono Wednesdays" led to cultural appropriation debates. Asian-American protesters cited Orientalism, racism, and cultural appropriation. Protests sparked global cultural debate and appropriation. The protests lacked Japanese and Japanese-American representation, say critics. Scholars say Edward Said's "Orientalism" may not always apply.
Cultural appropriation could harm kimono exhibitions. War can hinder cultural exchange and Japanese fashion abroad. Japanese mainstream media and cultural commentators rarely mention it. Cultural appropriation may lead to kimono experimentation, say Japanese commentators. Cultural appropriation and Japanese fashion remain hot topics. Globally, the industry must balance cultural integrity and innovation.

Installation arts
Japanese architecture was originally heavily influenced by Chinese architecture and later developed many unique aspects indigenous to Japan. Examples of traditional architecture are seen at temples, Shinto shrines, and castles in Kyoto and Nara. Some of these buildings are constructed with traditional gardens, which are influenced by Zen ideas. Some modern architects, such as Yoshio Taniguchi and Tadao Ando are known for their amalgamation of Japanese traditional and Western architectural influences.
Traditional Japanese garden architecture is considered to hold the same importance as traditional building architecture, and both are influenced by similar historical and religious backgrounds. A primary design principle of a traditional garden is the creation of the landscape based on, or at least greatly influenced by, the style of three-dimensional monochrome ink (sumi) landscape painting known as sumi-e or suibokuga; as such, garden landscaping is elevated to the status of an artform in Japan.
Traditional Japanese sculptures mainly focused on Buddhist images, such as Tathagata, Bodhisattva, and Myō-ō. The oldest sculpture in Japan is a wooden statue of Amitābha at the Zenkō-ji temple. In the Nara period, Buddhist statues were made by the national government to boost its prestige. These examples are seen in present-day Nara and Kyoto, most notably a colossal bronze statue of the Buddha Vairocana in the Tōdai-ji temple.
Wood has traditionally been used as the chief material in Japan, along with traditional Japanese architecture. Statues are often lacquered, gilded, or brightly painted, although there are commonly few traces of this on the surface. Bronze and other metals are generally not used. Other materials, such as stone and pottery, have had extremely important roles in traditional sculpture.

Music
The music of Japan includes a wide array of styles both distinctly traditional and modern. Traditional Japanese music is quite different from Western music and is based on the intervals of human breathing rather than mathematical timing; traditional music also typically slides between notes, a feature also not commonly found in Western music. The word for music in Japanese is ongaku (音楽), combining the kanji on (音, "sound") with the kanji gaku (楽, "enjoyment"). Major aesthetic concepts are jo-ha-kyū and ma. Jo-ha-kyū (序破急) roughly translates to "beginning, break, rapid", it essentially means that all actions or efforts should begin slowly, speed up, and then end swiftly. Ma literally means a space or interval between two points (in space or time). In music, it refers to rhythm. In nagauta (長唄, literally "long song") (played on the shamisen and used in kabuki theater), uki-ma implies a slight lengthening of the first of a pair of beats, while tsume-ma implies the reverse. It is this meaning of timing that is seen as a unique aesthetic to explain otherwise inexplicable aspects of Japanese performing arts. Japanese music stresses sound quality and prizes the richness and complexity of each instrument's sound spectrum. Noise is also used in a highly formalized manner to imitate "nature" and the expressive energy and artistic potential of noise are accepted and incorporated.

History of traditional music
Traditional Japanese music finds its first major historic periods in the Nara (710–794) and Heian (794–1185) periods. The two most common kinds of music during this time were the music of the court (Gagaku) and the music of Buddhist rituals (shōmyō). The music of the Nara period can be classified as belonging to the first international period in Japanese music history. The court music was all of Chinese, Korean, or Indian origin and was played primarily by foreign musicians in its original style. Gagaku classical music has been performed at the Imperial court since the Heian period. At the same time, Buddhist ritual music exerted some influence on the native vocal style. While poetry anthologies indicate that folk music had continued its steady pace, the historical records and relics show us music that was primarily instrumental and often connected with dance. By the time of the Kamakura period, most traces of the international character of Japanese music had disappeared. Court music in general was declining, while there was a steady growth of more theatrical arts. The indigenous folk ritual music of flute and drums here encountered the aristocratic aesthetic of poetry and literary tales. Japan's indigenous musical culture can still be found in much of folk music and the music of Shinto festivals in local communities.

Traditional instruments
Several traditional instruments were adopted and assimilated into Japanese culture from various sources. They were further experimented with and developed by Japan. One of the imported end-blown bamboo flutes from China developed into the shakuhachi, which became the ritual instrument of the Fuke sect of Zen monks. By the middle of the eighteenth century, in secular performances, the shamisen lute and koto, invented in China and brought to Japan during the Nara Period, 13-string zither as used for genteel entertainment and professionally controlled by blind musicians who had the rights to heike narrative. The shamisen, modified from the Chinese sanxian introduced via the Ryukyu Islands in the late sixteenth century, came into its own in the theatrical contexts of bunraku puppet drama and kabuki drama.

Modern music
Japan is the second largest music market in the world behind the United States, and is the largest in Asia, with most of the market dominated by Japanese artists. Local music often appears at karaoke venues on lease from record labels.
Western music has been adopted and adapted to the Japanese context and has often in the process become Japanized (domesticated) and different from its model. Hybrid music has resulted, such as enka, J-pop, and 'contemporary Japanese music' (gendai hōgaku) or 'new Japanese music' (shin-hōgaku). Famous enka singers include Hibari Misora, Saburo Kitajima, Ikuzo Yoshi, and Haruo Minami. One notable contemporary influence on Japanese musical music came from Ainu music and the so-called nationalist composer Ifukube Akiraa (b. 1914 in Hokkaido) who brought the tonkori zither onto the World Music scene.
In the late 20th century Japanese music rose in popularity with Aidoru (Japanese Idols) with popular audition shows such as the Suta¯tanjo¯(A Star Is Born). Japanese music further evolved in the jazz, pop, R&B, and Rock music genres and continues into today. Popular artists of the 20th-21st centuries include Yoko Ono, Suzuka Nakamoto, Koji Tamaki, Hideto Takarai, Takahiro Moriuchi, Kenshi Yonezu, and Haruomi Hosono. Popular groups of the same eras include The Oral Cigarettes, Yoasobi, Bump of Chicken, King Gnu, Mrs. Green Apple, Fishmans, and Perfume.,  another popular form of music from Japan is Vocaloid music, popular vocaloids include Hatsune Miku, Kagamine Rin/Len, Kasane Teto, these were made popular in the early 2000s and late 2010s, with popular events in Japan including Magical Mirai, and Miku Expo, this type of music is also popular in Western culture, ,

Performing arts
The four traditional theatres from Japan are noh (or nō), kyōgen, kabuki, and bunraku. Noh had its origins in the union of the sarugaku, with music and dance made by Kan'ami and Zeami Motokiyo. Among the characteristic aspects of it are the masks, costumes, and the stylized gestures, sometimes accompanied by a fan that can represent other objects. The Noh programs are presented in alternation with the ones of kyōgen, traditionally in numbers of five, but currently in groups of three.
The kyōgen, of a humorous character, had an older origin, in 8th century entertainment brought from China, developing itself in sarugaku. In kyōgen, masks are rarely used and even if the plays can be associated with the ones of noh, currently many are not.
Kabuki appears in the beginning of the Edo period from the representations and dances of Izumo no Okuni in Kyoto. Due to concerns over the number of actresses engaged in selling sex, the participation of women in the plays was forbidden by the government in 1629, and the feminine characters had passed to be represented only by men (onnagata). Recent attempts to reintroduce actresses in kabuki had not been well accepted. Another characteristic of kabuki is the use of makeup for the actors in historical plays (kumadori) and the performance of nagauta ballads.
Japanese puppet theater (bunraku) developed in the same period as kabuki, in both competition with and collaboration with its actors and authors. The origin of bunraku, however, is older, beginning in the Heian period. In 1914, the Takarazuka Revue was founded, a company solely composed by women who introduced the revue to Japan.

Sports and leisure
In the long feudal period governed by the samurai class, some methods that were used to train warriors were developed into well-ordered martial arts, in modern times referred to collectively as koryū. Examples include kenjutsu, kendo, kyūdō, sōjutsu, jujutsu, and sumo, all of which were established in the Edo period. After the rapid social change in the Meiji Restoration, some martial arts changed into modern sports, called gendai budō. Judo was developed by Kanō Jigorō, who studied some sects of jujutsu. These sports are still widely practiced in present-day Japan and other countries.
Baseball, association football, and other popular Western sports were imported to Japan in the Meiji period. These sports are commonly practiced in schools, along with traditional martial arts. Baseball, soccer, football, and ping pong are the most popular sports in Japan. Association football gained prominence in Japan after the J League (Japan Professional Football League) was established in 1991. Japan also co-hosted the 2002 FIFA World Cup with Korea. In addition, there are many semi-professional organizations, which are sponsored by private companies: for example, volleyball, basketball, rugby union, table tennis, and so on. 
Japan has also hosted the Olympic Games, in 1964, 1972, 1998, 2020,

Cuisine
Through a long culinary past, the Japanese have developed sophisticated and refined cuisine. In more recent years, Japanese food has become fashionable and popular in the United States, Europe, and many other areas. Dishes such as sushi, tempura, noodles, and teriyaki are some of the foods that are commonly known. The Japanese diet consists principally of rice; fresh, lean seafood; and pickled or boiled vegetables. The Japanese diet is often believed to be related to the longevity of Japanese people.
Despite the traditional cuisine (和食 washoku) being very important and present, western cuisine (洋食 yōshoku) has influenced Japanese eating culture tremendously.

Popular culture
Japanese popular culture not only reflects the attitudes and concerns of the present day but also provides a link to the past. Popular films, television programs, manga, music, anime and video games all developed from older artistic and literary traditions, and many of their themes and styles of presentation can be traced to traditional art forms. Contemporary forms of popular culture, much like the traditional forms, provide not only entertainment but also an escape for the contemporary Japanese from the problems of an industrial world. Many anime and manga series are very popular around the world and continue to become popular, as well as Japanese video games, fashion, and game shows.
In the late 1980s, the family was the focus of leisure activities, such as excursions to parks or shopping districts. Although Japan is often thought of as a hard-working society with little time for leisure, the Japanese seek entertainment wherever they can. It is common to see Japanese commuters riding the train to work, enjoying their favorite manga, or listening through earphones to the latest in popular music. A wide variety of types of popular entertainment are available. There is a large selection of music, films, and the products of a huge manga and anime industry, among other forms of entertainment, from which to choose. Game centers, bowling alleys, and karaoke are popular hangout places for teens while older people may play shogi or go in specialized parlors. Together, the publishing, film/video, music/audio, and game industries in Japan make up the growing Japanese content industry.
As of 2023, Japan's overseas exports of cultural content recorded 5,776.9 billion yen.

Cultural landscapes
There are 51 official cultural landscapes (文化的景観, bunkateki keikan) in Japan. These landscapes evolved with the way of life and geocultural features of a region, and which are indispensable for understanding the lifestyle of the Japanese people.
The Three Views of Japan (日本三景, Nihon Sankei) is the canonical list of Japan's three most celebrated scenic sights, attributed to 1643 scholar Hayashi Gahō. These are the pine-clad islands of Matsushima in Miyagi Prefecture, the pine-clad sandbar of Amanohashidate in Kyoto Prefecture, and Itsukushima Shrine in Hiroshima Prefecture. In 1915, the New Three Views of Japan were selected with a national election by the Jitsugyo no Nihon Sha (株式会社実業之日本社, Kabushiki Kaisha Jitsugyō no Nihon Sha). In 2003, the Three Major Night Views of Japan were selected by the New Three Major Night Views of Japan and the 100 Night Views of Japan Club (新日本三大夜景・夜景100選事務局).

National symbols
The Japanese archipelago is located to the east of the Asian continent. Japan is regarded as the most eastern Asian country, because east of Japan is the vast Pacific Ocean. Minamitorishima is Japan's easternmost island. Thus Japan is the land where the sun rises before the Asian continent. The kanji that make up the name of Japan literally mean 'sun origin' (日本). It is pronounced as 'Nihon' or 'Nippon' in Japanese, and is often referred to by the epithet "Land of the Rising Sun". The Nisshōki (日章旗, "sun-rise flag") is the national flag of Japan. It symbolizes the rising sun and corresponds with the name of Japan. The earliest accounts of the rising sun flag is in the 7th century CE. In 607, an official correspondence that began with "from the Emperor of the rising sun" was sent to Chinese Emperor Yang of Sui. Thus the central importance of the sun in Japanese culture is represented in the national flag and other cultural goods. Similarly, the Japan Self-Defense Forces have flags that symbolize the sun.
The Sun also plays an important role in Japanese mythology and religion as the emperor is said to be the direct descendant of the Sun goddess Amaterasu, the personification of Japan. She is seen as the goddess of the Sun and the universe in Shinto religion. The emperor is "the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people." Emperor Jimmu (神武天皇, Jinmu-tennō) is the national founder of Japan.
The national animals are the green pheasant, koi fish and the great purple emperor butterfly. The Imperial Seal of Japan is one of the national seals and a crest (mon) used by the Emperor of Japan and members of the Imperial Family. The cherry blossom (Prunus serrulata) & chrysanthemum morifolium are de facto national flowers of Japan. Japan's de facto national dish is sushi, Japanese curry and ramen. The de facto national liquor is sake.
Mount Fuji (富士山, Fujisan) is the national mountain of Japan. It is one of Japan's "Three Holy Mountains" (三霊山, Sanreizan) along with Mount Tate and Mount Haku. It is also a Special Place of Scenic Beauty and one of Japan's Historic Sites. The summit is considered a sacred place since ancient times. As a national symbol of the country, Mount Fuji has been depicted in various art and media such as painting, woodblock prints (such as the Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji), poetry, music, theater, film, manga, anime and pottery.

Military culture
Japanese military culture covered stratocracy, household rule, ritual, religion, weapons, training and strategy. Early warriors grew from elite families, provincial offices and armed service before the rise of the samurai as a hereditary status and the rule of shogunate. Inscribed swords recorded rulers, family lines and hereditary service. They served as weapons, gifts, sacred objects and marks of authority.
Warrior houses joined kin, adopted heirs, marriage allies and armed vassals. Adoption absorbed rivals, marriage formed alliances and succession remained open to sons, brothers, cousins and outsiders. Military service brought land, office, income and legal support. Weak rewards encouraged defection. Gifts, feasts and shared drinking joined households but drunken violence harmed relations and honour.
From the Mongol invasions of Japan through the Ōnin War, samurai produced formal military records. They submitted gunchūjō petitions listing routes, wounds, deaths, captured heads, witnesses and first entry into enemy positions. Commanders issued kanjō letters of praise and sealed confirmations, while later armies compiled rosters of names, wounds and service. These documents turned battlefield reputation into claims for land tenure, office, income and promotion. Military memory also shaped Japanese literature through the gunki monogatari tradition, including The Tale of the Heike, Taiheiki, Gikeiki, Azuma Kagami and the illustrated Mōko Shūrai Ekotoba.
Swords were named, inherited and gifted. Armour, kabuto, banners, crests and horse gear showed rank and allegiance. Enemy heads rewarded for victory and service. Head displays, captive parades and army processions made power visible in streets and courts. Seppuku protected rank and the body after defeat. Banishment or Sōtō monastic tonsure marked symbolic death and ended a warrior’s political career; exile or loss of his lord could leave him a rōnin. Burning a rival warrior house’s residence served as retribution, ritual purification and the public erasure of the defeated house’s presence.

Early firearms appeared in Kyoto during the Ōnin War. Sixteenth-century armies trained gunners, stored bullets and gunpowder, used firing screens and placed volleys under command. Portuguese powder recipes spread among daimyō. Ōtomo Sōrin owned a breech-loading cannon marked with a Christian emblem. Matchlocks served beside pikes, bows and swords.

In the Seto Inland Sea, kaizoku later styled suigun formed alliances led by the Noshima, Kurushima and Innoshima Murakami, Nomi, Manabe, Atagi and Kuki houses. They served the Mōri, Oda and other daimyō, linking pilots, sailors, fishermen, merchants and shipwrights. A house mon granted safe conduct, while island forts controlled straits. Murakami worship centred on Ōyamazumi Shrine, votive renga for safe voyages; Kuki power centred on fleet command under Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi. At Kizugawaguchi, crews used boarding, matchlocks, cannon and incendiaries, and honoured the ship-spirit funadama.

Warriors sought the favour of Hachiman and other kami, raised banners at shrines, read dreams and omens, purified themselves after bloodshed, and offered swords, armour, bows, banners and land after victory. Buddhist prayer also shaped courage, death and loyalty: some defeated bands invoked Amida Buddha and faced west toward the Pure Land, while oaths called on Buddhist and Shinto deities to punish betrayal.
Religious communities could become military communities. Hokke congregations joined chanting, drums, bells, banners, shared meals and temple discipline with defence, policing and war. Armies also drew on ashigaru, peasants, mercenaries, religious leagues and urban bands. In Kyoto, temple bells summoned neighbourhoods to build bamboo barriers, guard gates.
The Shōninki placed shinobi within this moral world, stressing secrecy, self-control, disguise, local custom and knowledge of religious life as tools of reconnaissance and deception. Prolonged war in fourteenth-century Kyushu also linked warrior households, Buddhist temples and merchant medicine. Traders at Hakata carried Chinese drugs, aromatics and formulas with West Asian roots into Buddhist healing and battlefield care.
Training covered archery, riding, swordsmanship, hunting and contests. Yabusame, kasagake and inu-ō-mono joined riding skill, ritual and public display. Tōshiya archery rewarded speed, endurance, accuracy and lordly patronage. Warrior culture also joined the tea ceremony, Noh, incense, calligraphy and ikebana. Shogi gained military meanings in Meiji writing. Zen texts linked combat with calm attention and free movement.
The Meiji government introduced conscription and ended samurai sword privileges in 1876. Martial schools became modern budō, school lessons and public contests. Modern bushidō joined older warrior texts, Japanese nationalism, school ethics and European chivalry.

Gallery
See also
Notes
References
Cwiertka, Katarzyna J. (2007). Modern Japanese Cuisine: Food, Power and National Identity. Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-298-0. Review
Japan  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Country Studies. Federal Research Division.
Goldstein-Gidoni, Ofra (Fall 1999). "Kimono and the Construction of Gendered and Cultural Identities". Ethnology. 38 (4): 351–370. doi:10.2307/3773912. JSTOR 3773912.
Martin, Richard (1995). "Our Kimono Mind: Reflections on 'Japanese Design: A Survey since 1950'". Journal of Design History. 8 (3): 215–223. doi:10.1093/jdh/8.3.215.
Nakagawa, Keiichirō; Rosovsky, Henry (Spring–Summer 1963). "The Case of the Dying Kimono: The Influence of Changing Fashions on the Development of the Japanese Woolen Industry". The Business History Review. 37 (1/2): 59–80. doi:10.2307/3112093. JSTOR 3112093. S2CID 154748596.
Dyer, Henry (1909). Japan in World Politics: A Study in International Dynamics. Blackie & Son Limited.
Varley, Paul. Japanese Culture, 4th edn. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press, 2000.
Nippon: The Land And Its People, 3rd edn. Tokyo: Nippon Steel Human Resources Development, 1988.

Further reading
Ruth Benedict. The chrysanthemum and the sword: patterns of Japanese culture. NY: Houghton Mifflin, 1946 (repr. 1974, 2005).
Victoria Lyon-Bestor, Theodore C. Bestor, & Akiko Yamagata, eds. Routledge Handbook of Japanese Culture and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 2011.
Albert M. Craig. The heritage of Japanese civilization, 2nd edn. Boston: Prentice Hall, 2010.
Joy Hendry. Understanding Japanese society, 5th edn. Abingdon: Routledge, 2019.
Momoyama, Japanese art in the age of grandeur. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1975. ISBN 978-0-87099-125-7.
John Nathan. Japan Unbound: A Volatile Nation's Quest for Pride and Purpose. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2004.
Kamei, Shunsuke (June 1981). "The Kiss and Japanese Culture after World War II". Comparative Literature Studies. 18 (2): 114–123. ISSN 0010-4132. JSTOR 40246247.
Yoshio Sugimoto. An introduction to Japanese society, 5th edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Noriko Takada & R. Lampkin, eds. The Japanese way: aspects of behavior, attitudes, and customs of the Japanese, 2nd edn. NY: McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Hiroko Takeda & Mark Williams, eds. Routledge handbook of contemporary Japan. Abingdon: Routledge, 2021.

External links

Japanese-City.com Japanese Cultural Events by Japanese Organizations throughout America.
The History of Japanese Calligraphy Archived 30 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine In English, at BeyondCalligraphy.com
Japan Society – New York City North America's single major producer of high-quality content on Japan for an English-speaking audience.
Agency for Cultural Affairs
Traditional Culture – The Imperial Household Agency
"Working with the Japanese," BBC
Rare Materials Exhibition – Kyoto University Digital Library(貴重資料画像--京都大学電子図書館) Archived 1 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Image files of rare materials related to culture of Japan
How The People of Japan See Anime Culture Archived 6 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine .
Japanese Architecture and Art Net Users System
Web Japan

## Cuisine of Japan
Japanese cuisine encompasses the regional and traditional foods of Japan, which have developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes. The traditional cuisine of Japan (Japanese: washoku) is based on rice with miso soup and other dishes with an emphasis on seasonal ingredients. Side dishes often consist of fish, pickled vegetables, tamagoyaki, and vegetables cooked in broth. Common seafood is often grilled, but it is also sometimes served raw as sashimi or as sushi. Seafood and vegetables are also deep-fried in a light batter, as tempura. Apart from rice, a staple includes noodles, such as soba and udon. Japan also has many simmered dishes, such as fish products in broth called oden, or beef in sukiyaki and nikujaga.
Historically influenced by Chinese cuisine, Japanese cuisine has also opened up to influence from Western cuisines in the modern era. Dishes inspired by foreign food—in particular Chinese food—like ramen and gyōza, as well as foods like spaghetti, curry and hamburgers, have been adapted to Japanese tastes and ingredients. Traditionally, the Japanese shunned meat as a result of adherence to Buddhism, but with the modernization of Japan in the 1880s, meat-based dishes such as tonkatsu and yakiniku have become common. Since this time, Japanese cuisine, particularly sushi and ramen, has become popular globally.
In 2011, Japan overtook France to become the country with the most 3-starred Michelin restaurants; as of 2018, the capital of Tokyo has maintained the title of the city with the most 3-starred restaurants in the world. In 2013, Japanese cuisine was added to the UNESCO Intangible Heritage List.

History
Rice is a staple in Japanese cuisine. Wheat and soybeans were introduced shortly after rice. All three act as staple foods in Japanese cuisine today. At the end of the Kofun period and beginning of the Asuka period, Buddhism became the official religion of the country. Therefore, eating meat and fish was prohibited. In 675 AD, Emperor Tenmu prohibited the eating of horses, dogs, monkeys, and chickens. In the 8th and 9th centuries, many emperors continued to prohibit killing many types of animals. However, meat continued to be eaten in some areas. In Kagoshima, pig farming flourished, and in Oumi, there was a culture of eating beef. In addition, in the Suwa region, there was a ritual of deer sacrifice for Shinto rituals. The number of regulated meats increased significantly, leading to the banning of all mammals except whale, which were categorized as fish. During the Asuka period, chopsticks were introduced to Japan. Initially, they were used only by the nobility. The general population used their hands, as utensils were quite expensive.
Due to the lack of meat products, Japanese people minimized spice utilization. Spices were rare to find at the time. Spices, like pepper and garlic, were used only in a minimalist amount. Spices widely used in Japan were sansho and black pepper. They were often used in noodle, white rice, and fish dishes. They were also used as a nourishing medicine. In the absence of meat, fish was served as the main protein, as Japan is an island nation. Fish has influenced many iconic Japanese dishes today. In the 9th century, grilled fish and sliced raw fish were widely popular. Japanese people who could afford it would eat fish at every meal; others would have to make do without animal protein for many of their meals. In traditional Japanese cuisine, oil and fat are usually avoided during the cooking process in order to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Preserving fish became a sensation and sushi originated as a means of preserving fish by fermenting it in boiled rice. Fish that are salted and then placed in rice are preserved by lactic acid fermentation, which helps prevent the proliferation of the bacteria that bring about putrefaction. During the 15th century, advancement and development helped shorten the fermentation of sushi to about one to two weeks. Sushi thus became popular both as a main meal and as a snack food, combining fish with rice. During the late Edo period (early 19th century), sushi without fermentation was introduced. Sushi was still being consumed with and without fermentation till the 19th century when the hand-rolled and nigiri-type sushi was invented.
In 1854, Japan started to enter new trade deals with Western countries. The concept of washoku (Japanese cuisine) was introduced in Japan following negotiations with the United States on a trade treaty. When Emperor Meiji took power in 1868 as part of the Meiji Restoration, the government began to adopt Western customs, including the use of animal products in food. The new ruler staged a New Year's feast designed to embrace the Western world and countries in 1872. The feast contained food that reflected European cuisine. For the first time in a thousand years, people were allowed to consume meat in public, and the general population started to include meat in their regular diets.

Culture
Terminology
The word washoku (和食) is now the common word for traditional Japanese cooking. The term kappō (割烹; lit. "cutting and boiling (meats)") is synonymous with "cooking", but became a reference to mostly Japanese cooking, or restaurants, and was much used in the Meiji and Taishō eras. It has come to connote a certain standard, perhaps even of the highest caliber, a restaurant with the most highly trained chefs. However, kappō is generally seen as an eating establishment which is slightly more casual or informal compared to the kaiseki.
The kaiseki (懐石, lit. "warming stone") is tied with the Japanese tea ceremony. The kaiseki is considered a (simplified) form of honzen-ryōri (本膳料理, lit. "main tray cooking"), which was formal banquet dining where several trays of food were served. The homophone term kaiseki ryōri (会席料理, lit. "gathering + seating") originally referred to a gathering of composers of haiku or renga, and the simplified version of the honzen dishes served at the poem parties became kaiseki ryōri. However, the meaning of kaiseki ryōri degenerated to become just another term for a sumptuous carousing banquet, or shuen (酒宴).

Traditional table settings
The traditional Japanese table setting has varied considerably over the centuries, depending primarily on the type of table common during a given era. Before the 19th century, small individual box tables (hakozen, 箱膳) or flat floor trays were set before each diner. Larger low tables (chabudai, ちゃぶ台) that accommodated entire families were gaining popularity by the beginning of the 20th century, but these gave way to Western-style dining tables and chairs by the end of the 20th century.
The traditional Japanese table setting is to place a bowl of rice on the diner's left and to place a bowl of miso soup on the diner's right side at the table. Behind these, each okazu is served on its own individual plate. Based on the standard three-okazu formula, behind the rice and soup are three flat plates to hold the three okazu; one to far back left, one at far back right, and one in the center. Pickled vegetables are often served on the side but are not counted as part of the three okazu. Chopsticks are generally placed at the very front of the tray near the diner with pointed ends facing left and supported by a chopstick rest, or hashioki.

Dining etiquette
Many restaurants and homes in Japan are equipped with Western-style chairs and tables. However, traditional Japanese low tables and cushions, usually found on tatami floors, are also very common. Tatami mats, which are made of straw, can be easily damaged and are hard to clean, thus shoes or any type of footwear are always taken off when stepping on tatami floors.
When dining in a traditional tatami room, sitting upright on the floor is common. In a casual setting, men usually sit with their feet crossed and women sit with both legs to one side. Only men are supposed to sit cross-legged. The formal way of sitting for both sexes is a kneeling style known as seiza. To sit in a seiza position, one kneels on the floor with legs folded under the thighs and the buttocks resting on the heels.
When dining out in a restaurant, the customers are guided to their seats by the host. The honored or eldest guest will usually be seated at the center of the table farthest from the entrance. In the home, the most important guest is also seated farthest away from the entrance. If there is a tokonoma, or alcove, in the room, the guest is seated in front of it. The host sits next to or closest to the entrance.
In Japan, it is customary to say itadakimasu ("I [humbly] receive") before starting to eat a meal. When saying itadakimasu, both hands are put together in front of the chest or on the lap. Itadakimasu is preceded by complimenting the appearance of food. Another customary and important etiquette is to say go-chisō-sama deshita ("It was a feast") to the host after the meal and the restaurant staff when leaving.

Traditional cuisine
Japanese cuisine is based on combining the staple food, which is steamed white rice or gohan (御飯), with one or more okazu (おかず), "main" or "side" dishes. This may be accompanied by a clear or miso soup and tsukemono (pickles). The phrase ichijū-sansai (一汁三菜, "one soup, three sides") refers to the makeup of a typical meal served but has roots in classic kaiseki, honzen, and yūshoku cuisine. The term is also used to describe the first course served in standard kaiseki cuisine nowadays.
The origin of Japanese "one soup, three sides" cuisine is a dietary style called Ichiju-Issai (一汁一菜, "one soup, one dish"), tracing back to the Five Great Zen Temples of the 12-century Kamakura period (Kamakura Gozan), developed as a form of meal that emphasized frugality and simplicity.
Rice is served in its own small bowl (chawan), and each main course item is placed on its own small plate (sara) or bowl (hachi) for each individual portion. This is done even in Japanese homes. This contrasts with Western-style home dinners in which each individual takes helpings from large serving dishes of food placed in the middle of the dining table. Japanese style traditionally abhors different flavored dishes touching each other on a single plate, so different dishes are given their own individual plates as mentioned or are partitioned using, for example, leaves. Placing main dishes on top of rice, thereby "soiling" it, is also frowned upon by traditional etiquette.

Although this tradition of not placing other foods on rice originated from classical Chinese dining formalities, especially after the adoption of Buddhist tea ceremonies; it became most popular and common during and after the Kamakura period, such as in the kaiseki (懐石). Although present-day Chinese cuisine has abandoned this practice, Japanese cuisine retains it. One exception is the popular donburi, in which toppings are directly served on rice.
The small rice bowl (茶碗, chawan), literally "tea bowl", doubles as a word for the large tea bowls in tea ceremonies. Thus in common speech, the drinking cup is referred to as yunomi-jawan or yunomi for the purpose of distinction. Among the nobility, each course of a full-course Japanese meal would be brought on serving napkins called zen (膳), which were originally platformed trays or small dining tables. In the modern age, faldstool trays or stackup-type legged trays may still be seen used in zashiki (座敷), i.e. tatami-mat rooms, for large banquets or at a ryokan type inn. Some restaurants might use the suffix -zen (膳) as a more sophisticated though dated synonym to the more familiar teishoku (定食), since the latter basically is a term for a combo meal served at a taishū-shokudō, akin to a diner. Teishoku means a meal of fixed menu (for example, grilled fish with rice and soup), a dinner à prix fixe served at shokudō (食堂, "dining hall") or ryōriten (料理店, "restaurant"), which is somewhat vague (shokudō can mean a diner-type restaurant or a corporate lunch hall); writer on Japanese popular culture Ishikawa Hiroyoshi defines it as fare served at teishoku dining halls (定食食堂, teishoku-shokudō), and comparable diner-like establishments.

Seasonality
Emphasis is placed on seasonality of food or shun (旬), and dishes are designed to herald the arrival of the four seasons or calendar months.
Seasonality means taking advantage of the "fruit of the mountains" (山の幸, yama no sachi; alt. "bounty of the mountains") (for example, bamboo shoots in spring, chestnuts in the autumn) as well as the "fruit of the sea" (海の幸, umi no sachi; alt. "bounty of the sea") as they come into season. Thus the first catch of skipjack tunas (初鰹, hatsu-gatsuo) that arrives with the Kuroshio Current has traditionally been greatly prized.
If something becomes available rather earlier than what is usual for the item in question, the first crop or early catch is called hashiri.
Use of tree leaves and branches as decor is also characteristic of Japanese cuisine. Maple leaves are often floated on water to exude coolness or ryō (涼); sprigs of nandina are popularly used. The haran (Aspidistra) and sasa bamboo leaves were often cut into shapes and placed underneath or used as separators.

UNESCO recognition
In February 2012, the Agency for Cultural Affairs recommended that 'Washoku (和食) : Traditional Dietary Cultures of the Japanese' be added to the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. On December 4, 2013, "Washoku, traditional dietary cultures  [sic] of the Japanese, notably for the celebration of New Year" was added to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, bringing the number of Japanese assets listed on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list to 22.

Traditional ingredients
A characteristic of traditional Japanese food is the sparing use of red meat, oils and fats, and dairy products. Use of ingredients such as soy sauce, miso, and umeboshi tends to result in dishes with high salt content, though there are low-sodium versions of these available.

Meat consumption
As Japan is an island nation surrounded by an ocean, its people have always taken advantage of the abundant seafood supply. It is the opinion of some food scholars that the Japanese diet always relied mainly on "grains with vegetables or seaweeds as main, with poultry secondary, and red meat in slight amounts" even before the advent of Buddhism which placed an even stronger taboo. The eating of "four-legged creatures" (四足, yotsuashi) was spoken of as taboo, unclean or something to be avoided by personal choice through the Edo period. The consumption of whale and terrapin meat were not forbidden under this definition. Despite this, the consumption of red meat did not completely disappear in Japan. Eating wild game—as opposed to domesticated livestock—was tolerated; in particular, trapped hare was counted using the measure word wa (羽), a term normally reserved for birds.

In 1872 of the Meiji restoration, as part of the opening up of Japan to Western influence, Emperor Meiji lifted the ban on the consumption of red meat. The removal of the ban encountered resistance and in one notable response, ten monks attempted to break into the Imperial Palace. The monks asserted that due to foreign influence, large numbers of Japanese had begun eating meat and that this was "destroying the soul of the Japanese people." Several of the monks were killed during the break-in attempt, and the remainder were arrested. On the other hand, the consumption of meat was accepted by the common people. Gyūnabe (牛鍋, beef hot pot), the prototype of sukiyaki, became the rage of the time. Western restaurants moved in, and some of them changed their form to Yōshoku (洋食, western foods).
Vegetable consumption has dwindled while processed foods have become more prominent in Japanese households due to the rising costs of general foodstuffs. Nonetheless, Kyoto vegetables, or Kyoyasai, are rising in popularity and different varieties of Kyoto vegetables are being revived.

Cooking oil
Generally speaking, traditional Japanese cuisine is prepared with little cooking oil. A major exception is the deep-frying of foods. This cooking method was introduced during the Edo period due to influence from Western (formerly called nanban-ryōri (南蛮料理)) and Chinese cuisine, and became commonplace with the availability of cooking oil due to increased productivity. Dishes such as tempura, aburaage, and satsuma age are now part of established traditional Japanese cuisine. Words such as tempura or hiryōzu (synonymous with ganmodoki) are said to be of Portuguese origin.
Also, certain rustic sorts of traditional Japanese foods such as kinpira, hijiki, and kiriboshi daikon usually involve stir-frying in oil before stewing in soy sauce. Some standard osōzai or obanzai dishes feature stir-fried Japanese greens with either age or chirimen-jako, dried sardines.

Seasonings
Traditional Japanese food is typically seasoned with a combination of dashi, soy sauce, sake and mirin, vinegar, sugar, and salt. A modest number of herbs and spices may be used during cooking as a hint or accent, or as a means of neutralizing fishy or gamy odors present. Examples of such spices include ginger, perilla and takanotsume (鷹の爪) red pepper.
Intense condiments, such as wasabi or Japanese mustard, are provided as condiments to raw fish, due to their effect on the mucous membrane which paralyze the sense of smell, particularly from fish odors. A sprig of mitsuba or a piece of yuzu rind floated on soups are called ukimi. Minced shiso leaves and myoga often serve as yakumi, a type of condiment paired with tataki of katsuo or soba. Shichimi is also a very popular spice mixture often added to soups, noodles and rice cakes. Shichimi is a chilli-based spice mix which contains seven spices: chilli, sansho, orange peel, black sesame, white sesame, hemp, ginger, and nori.

Garnishes
Once a main dish has been cooked, spices such as minced ginger and various pungent herbs may be added as a garnish, called tsuma. Finally, a dish may be garnished with minced seaweed in the form of crumpled nori or flakes of aonori.
Inedible garnishes are featured in dishes to reflect a holiday or the season. Generally these include inedible leaves, flowers native to Japan or with a long history of being grown in the country, as well as their artificial counterparts.

Salads
The o-hitashi or hitashi-mono (おひたし) is boiled green-leaf vegetables bunched and cut to size, steeped in dashi broth, eaten with dashes of soy sauce. Another item is sunomono (酢の物; "vinegar item"), which could be made with wakame seaweed, or be something like a kōhaku namasu (紅白なます; "red white namasu") made from thin toothpick slices of daikon and carrot. The so-called vinegar that is blended with the ingredient here is often sanbaizu (三杯酢; "three cupful/spoonful vinegar") which is a blend of vinegar, mirin, and soy sauce. A tosazu (土佐酢; "Tosa vinegar") adds katsuo dashi to this.
An aemono (和え物) is another group of items, describable as a sort of "tossed salad" or "dressed" (though aemono also includes thin strips of squid or fish sashimi (itozukuri) etc. similarly prepared). One type is goma-ae (胡麻和え) where usually vegetables such as green beans are tossed with white or black sesame seeds ground in a suribachi mortar bowl, flavored additionally with sugar and soy sauce. Shira-ae (白和え) adds tofu (bean curd) in the mix. An aemono is tossed with vinegar-white miso mix and uses wakegi scallion and baka-gai (バカガイ / 馬鹿貝; a trough shell, Mactra chinensis) as standard.

Eggs
Japanese egg dishes include tamagoyaki, onsen tamago, tamago-dōfu (jp) and chawanmushi. Datemaki is eaten during the New Year holidays.
Well-known rice dishes with eggs include oyakodon, omurice and tamago kake gohan that is simply raw egg on rice.

Rice
Rice has historically been the staple food of the Japanese people. Its fundamental importance is evident from the fact that the word for cooked rice, gohan or meshi, also stands for a "meal". While rice has an ancient history of cultivation in Japan, its use as a staple has not been universal. Notably, in northern areas (northern Honshū and Hokkaidō), other grains such as wheat were more common into the 19th century.
In most of Japan, rice used to be consumed for almost every meal, and although a 2007 survey showed that 70% of Japanese still eat it once or twice a day, its popularity is now declining. In the 20th century there has been a shift in dietary habits, with an increasing number of people choosing wheat-based products (such as bread and noodles) over rice.
Japanese rice is short-grained and becomes sticky when cooked. Most rice is sold as hakumai (白米, "white rice"), with the outer portion of the grains (糠, nuka) polished away. Unpolished brown rice (玄米, genmai) is considered less desirable, but its popularity has been increasing.

Noodles
Japanese noodles often substitute for a rice-based meal. Soba (thin, grayish-brown noodles containing buckwheat flour) and udon (thick wheat noodles) are the main traditional noodles, while ramen is a modern import and now very popular. There are also other, common noodles, such as somen (thin, white noodles containing wheat flour). Cold somen noodles are often eaten during the hot summer. Hiyashi chūka are also popular noodles in the summer.
Japanese noodles, such as soba and udon, are eaten as a standalone, and usually not with a side dish, in terms of general custom. It may have toppings, but they are called gu (具). The fried battered shrimp tempura sitting in a bowl of tempura-soba would be referred to as "the shrimp" or "the tempura", and not so much be referred to as a topping (gu). The identical toppings, if served as a dish to be eaten with plain white rice could be called okazu, so these terms are context-sensitive. Some noodle dishes derive their name from Japanese folklore, such as kitsune and tanuki, reflecting dishes in which the noodles can be changed, but the broth and garnishes correspond to their respective legend.
Hot noodles are usually served in a bowl already steeped in their broth and are called kakesoba or kakeudon. Cold soba arrive unseasoned and heaped atop a zaru or seiro, and are picked up with a chopstick and dunked in their dipping sauce. The broth can consist of many ingredients but is generally based on dashi; the sauce, called tsuyu, is usually more concentrated and made from soy sauce, dashi and mirin, sake or both.
In the simple form, yakumi (薬味, condiments and spices) such as shichimi, nori, finely chopped scallions, wasabi, etc. are added to the noodles, besides the broth/dip sauce.
Udon may also be eaten in kama-age style, piping hot straight out of the boiling pot, and eaten with plain soy sauce and sometimes with raw egg also.
Japanese noodles are traditionally eaten by bringing the bowl close to the mouth, and sucking in the noodles with the aid of chopsticks. The resulting loud slurping noise is considered normal in Japan, although in the 2010s concerns began to be voiced about the slurping being offensive to others, especially tourists. The word nuuhara (ヌーハラ, from "nuudoru harasumento", noodle harassment) was coined to describe this.

Sweets
Traditional Japanese sweets are known as wagashi. Ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used. More modern-day tastes includes green tea ice cream, a very popular flavor. Almost all manufacturers produce a version of it. Kakigōri  (かき氷) is a shaved ice dessert flavored with syrup or condensed milk. It is usually sold and eaten at summer festivals. A dessert very popular amongst children in Japan is dorayaki. They are sweet pancakes filled with a sweet red bean paste. They are mostly eaten at room temperature but are also considered very delicious hot. Similar sweets to dorayaki include imagawayaki and fish-shaped taiyaki. Sweet breads containing red bean paste, such as anpan and an-doughnut, are also commonly eaten.

Drinks
Tea
Green tea may be served with most Japanese dishes. It is produced in Japan and prepared in various forms, such as matcha, the tea used in the Japanese tea ceremony. Barley tea is a favorite drink during the hot summertime.

Soft drink
Japan has a vibrant soft drink culture, with local flavors like  ramune, melon soda, canned coffee, Calpis, and the citrusy electrolyte drink Pocari Sweat. Imported drinks garner unique meanings in Japan, for example, Dr Pepper has become associated as an intellectual beverage thanks to the anime Steins;Gate, as well as drinks like A&W Root Beer and their Restaurants having a strong ice cream float presence in Okinawa giving it an association with beach vacations.

Beer
Beer production started in Japan in the 1860s. The most commonly consumed beers in Japan are pale-coloured light lagers, with an alcohol strength of around 5.0% ABV. Lager beers are the most commonly produced beer style in Japan, but beer-like beverages, made with lower levels of malts called Happoshu (発泡酒, literally, "bubbly alcohol") or non-malt Happousei (発泡性, literally "effervescence") have captured a large part of the market as tax is substantially lower on these products. Beer and its varieties have a market share of almost 2/3 of alcoholic beverages.
Small local microbreweries have also gained increasing popularity since the 1990s, supplying distinct tasting beers in a variety of styles that seek to match the emphasis on craftsmanship, quality, and ingredient provenance often associated with Japanese food.

Sake
Sake is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 15–17% alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice. At traditional formal meals, it is considered an equivalent to rice and is not simultaneously taken with other rice-based dishes, although this notion is typically no longer applied to modern, refined, premium ("ginjo") sake, which bear little resemblance to the sakes of even 100 years ago. Side dishes for sake are particularly called sakana or otsumami.
Sake is brewed in a highly labor-intensive process more similar to beer production than winemaking, hence, the common description of sake as rice "wine" is misleading.
Sake is made with, by legal definition, strictly just four ingredients: special rice, water, koji, and special yeast.
As of 2014, Japan had some 1500 registered breweries, which produce thousands of different sakes. Sake characteristics and flavor profiles vary with regionality, ingredients, and the styles (maintained by brewmaster guilds) that brewery leaders want to produce.
Sake flavor profiles lend extremely well to pairing with a wide variety of cuisines, including non-Japanese cuisines.

Shōchū
Shōchū is a distilled spirit that is typically made from barley, sweet potato, buckwheat, or rice. Shōchū is produced everywhere in Japan, but its production started in Kyushu.

Whisky
Japanese whisky began commercial production in the early 20th century, and is now extremely popular, primarily consumed in highballs (ハイボール, haibōru). It is produced in the Scottish style, with malt whisky produced since the 1980s, and has won top international awards since the 2000s.

Wine
A domestic wine production has existed since the 1860s, yet most wine is imported. The total market share of wine on alcoholic beverages is about 3%.

Specialty food
Wagyu is the collective name for the four principal Japanese breeds of beef cattle. All wagyū cattle derive from cross-breeding in the early twentieth century of native Japanese cattle with imported stock, mostly from Europe.
In several areas of Japan, Wagyu beef is shipped carrying area names. Some examples are Matsusaka beef, Kobe beef, Yonezawa beef, Ōmi beef, and Sanda beef. In recent years, Wagyu beef has increased in fat percentage due to a decrease in grazing and an increase in using feed, resulting in larger, fattier cattle.

Specialty eggs—compared to ordinary eggs, eggs produced with special feed and poultry-raising.

The Yubari King (夕張メロン, Yūbari Meron; Yūbari melon) is a cantaloupe cultivar farmed in greenhouses in Yūbari, Hokkaido, a small city close to Sapporo.
Square or cube watermelons are watermelons grown into the shape of a cube. Cube watermelons are commonly sold in Japan, where they are essentially ornamental and are often very expensive, with prices as high as US$200.

Cooking techniques
Different cooking techniques are applied to each of the three okazu; they may be raw (sashimi), grilled, simmered (sometimes called boiled), steamed, deep-fried, vinegared, or dressed.

Dishes
In ichijū-sansai (一汁三菜, "one soup, three sides"), the word sai (菜) has the basic meaning of "vegetable", but secondarily means any accompanying dish (whether it uses fish or meat), with the more familiar combined form sōzai (惣菜), which is a term for any side dish, such as the vast selections sold at Japanese supermarkets or depachikas.
It figures in the Japanese word for appetizer, zensai (前菜); main dish, shusai (主菜); or sōzai (惣菜) (formal synonym for okazu), but the latter is considered somewhat of a ladies' term or nyōbō kotoba.

 

Below are listed some of the most common categories for prepared food:

Yakimono (焼き物), grilled and pan-fried dishes
Nimono (煮物), stewed/simmered/cooked/boiled dishes
Itamemono (炒め物), stir-fried dishes
Mushimono (蒸し物), steamed dishes
Agemono (揚げ物), deep-fried dishes
Sashimi (刺身), sliced raw fish
Suimono (吸い物) and shirumono (汁物), soups
Tsukemono (漬け物), pickled/salted vegetables
Aemono (和え物), dishes dressed with various kinds of sauce
Sunomono (酢の物), vinegared dishes
Chinmi (珍味), delicacies

Classification
Kaiseki
Kaiseki, closely associated with tea ceremony (chanoyu), is a high form of hospitality through cuisine. The style is minimalist, extolling the aesthetics of wabi-sabi. Like the tea ceremony, appreciation of the diningware and vessels is part of the experience. In the modern standard form, the first course consists of ichijū-sansai (one soup, three dishes), followed by the serving of sake accompanied by dish(es) plated on a square wooden bordered tray of sorts called hassun (八寸). Sometimes another element called shiizakana (強肴) is served to complement the sake, for guests who are heavier drinkers.

Vegetarian
Strictly vegetarian food is rare since even vegetable dishes are flavored with the ubiquitous dashi stock, usually made with katsuobushi (dried skipjack tuna flakes), and are therefore pescetarian more often than carnivorous. An exception is shōjin-ryōri (精進料理), vegetarian dishes developed by Buddhist monks. However, the advertised shōjin-ryōri at public eating places includes some non-vegetarian elements. Vegetarianism, fucha-ryōri (普茶料理) was introduced from China by the Ōbaku sect (a sub-sect of Zen Buddhism), and which some sources still regard as part of "Japanese cuisine". The sect in Japan was founded by the priest Ingen (d. 1673), and is headquartered in Uji, Kyoto. The Japanese name for the common green bean takes after this priest who allegedly introduced the New World crop via China. One aspect of the fucha-ryōri practiced at the temple is the wealth of modoki-ryōri (もどき料理, "mock foods"), one example being mock-eel, made from strained tofu, with nori seaweed used expertly to mimic the black skin. The secret ingredient used is grated gobō (burdock) roots.
Masakazu Tada, Honorary Vice-President of the International Vegetarian Union for 25 years from 1960, stated that "Japan was vegetarian for 1,000 years". The taboo against eating meat was lifted in 1872 by the Meiji Emperor as part of an effort towards westernizing Japan. British journalist J. W. Robertson Scott reported in the 1920s that the society was still 90% vegetarian, and 50–60% of the population ate fish only on festive occasions, probably due to poverty more than for any other reason.

Regional cuisine
Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties known as kyōdo-ryōri (郷土料理), many of them originating from dishes prepared using traditional recipes with local ingredients. Foods from the Kantō region taste very strong. For example, the dashi-based broth for serving udon noodles is heavy on dark soy sauce, similar to soba broth. On the other hand, Kansai region foods are lightly seasoned, with clear udon noodles. made with light soy sauce.

Dishes for special occasions
In Japanese tradition, some dishes are strongly tied to a festival or event. These dishes include:

In some regions, on every first and fifteenth day of the month, people eat a mixture of rice and azuki (azuki meshi (小豆飯); see Sekihan).

Imported and adapted foods
Japan has a long history of importing food from other countries, some of which are now part of Japan's most popular cuisine. Ramen is considered an important part to their culinary history, to the extent where in survey of 2,000 Tokyo residents, instant ramen came up many times as a product they thought was an outstanding Japanese invention. Believed to have originated in China, ramen became popular in Japan after the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), when many Chinese students were displaced to Japan.

Curry is another popular imported dish and is ranked near the top of nearly all Japanese surveys for favorite foods. The origins of curry, as well many other foreign imports such as pan or bread, are linked to the emergence of yōshoku, or western cuisine. Yōshoku can be traced as far back as the late Muromachi period (1336–1573) during a culinary revolution called namban ryori (南蛮料理), which means "Southern barbarian cooking", as it is rooted in European cuisine. This cuisine style was first seen in Nagasaki, which served as the point of contact between Europe and Japan at that point in time. Food items such as potatoes, corn, dairy products, as well as the hard candy kompeito (金平糖), spread during this time. This cuisine became popular in the Meiji era, which is considered by many historians to be when Japan first opened itself to the outside world.
Bread was not a traditional food in Japan, but shokupan, or Japanese milk bread, was developed and came into broad use after the American response to post-World War II Japanese rice shortages included relief shipments of wheat.
Today, many of these imported items still hold a heavy presence in Japan.

Foods imported from Portugal in the 16th century
Other adapted cuisines in Japan

Yōshoku—Foreign (Western) food, dishes
Source:
Japan today abounds with home-grown, loosely Western-style food. Many of these were invented in the wake of the 1868 Meiji Restoration and the end of national seclusion, when the sudden influx of foreign (in particular, Western) culture led to many restaurants serving Western food, known as yōshoku (洋食), a shortened form of seiyōshoku (西洋食, "Western cuisine"), opening up in cities. Restaurants that serve these foods are called yōshokuya (洋食屋, "Western cuisine restaurants").
Many yōshoku items from that time have been adapted to a degree that they are now considered Japanese and are an integral part of any Japanese family menu. Many are served alongside rice and miso soup, and eaten with chopsticks. Yet, due to their origins these are still categorized as yōshoku as opposed to the more traditional washoku (和食, "Japanese cuisine").

Chūka ryōri—Japanese Chinese cuisine
Chinese cuisine is one of the oldest and most prominent foreign influences on Japanese cuisine, predating the introduction of Western influences into the country by thousands of years. Many elements of Chinese cuisine have been fully assimilated into Japanese culinary traditions.
A domesticated variety of peach from China appeared in Japan around 4700–4400 BCE, during the Jōmon period. The Yayoi period arrived with immigrants from mainland East Asia introducing rice agriculture and other elements of continental material culture to the Japanese archipelago. The migration of early rice farmers into Japan coincided with a range of sociopolitical transformations occurring in China, beginning with the eastward expansion of the Shang dynasty from 1600 to 1400 BCE. It is believed that rice farming spread to Japan from the Yangtze River Delta to the Shandong peninsula, then to the Liaodong peninsula, and finally to the Korean peninsula, from where it was directly introduced to the Japanese archipelago.
Chopsticks were adopted from China around the latter half of the 7th century, during the Asuka period, with the earliest known examples in Japan discovered at archaeological sites such as Asuka Itabuki-no-miya and Fujiwara-kyo. Tea, soy sauce, tofu, and noodles were borrowed from China in the 8th century, during the Nara period. The Shippoku culinary style of Nagasaki, which originated in the 17th century, reflects strong Chinese influences.
These early elements are generally considered distinct from modern Japanese Chinese cuisine, known as chūka ryōri, which emerged in the 19th century. Iconic dishes of chūka ryōri include ramen, gyoza, and chukaman. In contrast, earlier dishes of Chinese origin such as kakuni and karaage are often regarded as part of washoku, or traditional Japanese cuisine, due to their longstanding integration into Japanese food culture.

Okonomiyaki
Okonomiyaki is a savoury pancake containing a variety of ingredients in a wheat-flour-based batter.

Tonkatsu
Tonkatsu is a breaded, deep-fried pork cutlet. It is frequently served with tonkatsu sauce.

Curry
Curry was introduced by Anglo-Indian officers of the Royal Navy from India who brought curry powder to Japan in the Meiji era. The Imperial Japanese Navy adopted curry to prevent beriberi. Overtime it was reinvented and adapted to suit Japanese tastes that it became uniquely Japanese. It is consumed so much that it is considered a national dish. Many recipes are on the menu of the JMSDF. A variety of vegetables and meats are used to make Japanese curry, usually vegetables like onions, carrots, and potatoes. The types of meat used are beef, pork, and chicken. A popular dish is Katsu-karē which is a breaded deep-fried cutlet (tonkatsu; usually pork or chicken) with Japanese curry sauce. Japanese curry can be found in foods such as curry udon, curry bread, and katsukarē, tonkatsu served with curry. It's very commonly made with rice beside the curry on the dish called "curry" (カレー, karē). This can be eaten during dinner.

Wafū burgers (Japanese-style burgers)
Hamburger chains active in Japan include McDonald's, Burger King, First Kitchen, Lotteria and MOS Burger. Many chains developed uniquely Japanese versions of American fast food such as the teriyaki burger, kinpira (sauté) rice burger, fried shrimp burgers, and green tea milkshakes.

Italian
High-class Japanese chefs have preserved many Italian seafood dishes that are forgotten in other countries. These include pasta with prawns, lobster (a specialty known in Italy as pasta all'aragosta), crab (an Italian specialty; in Japan it is served with a different species of crab), and pasta with sea urchin sauce (sea urchin pasta being a specialty of the Puglia region).

Outside Japan
Many countries have imported portions of Japanese cuisine. Some may adhere to the traditional preparations of the cuisines, but in some cultures the dishes have been adapted to fit the palate of the local populace. In 1970s sushi travelled from Japan to Canada and the United States, it was modified to suit the American palate, and re-entered the Japanese market as "American Sushi". An example of this phenomenon is the California roll, which was created in North America in the 1970s, rose in popularity across the United States through the 1980s, and thus sparked Japanese food's—more precisely, sushi's—global popularity.
In 2014, Japanese Restaurant Organization has selected potential countries where Japanese food is becoming increasingly popular, and conducted research concerning the Japanese restaurants abroad. These key nations or region are Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesia. This was meant as an effort to promote Japanese cuisine and to expand the market of Japanese ingredients, products and foodstuffs. Numbers of Japanese foodstuff and seasoning brands such as Ajinomoto, Kikkoman, Nissin and Kewpie mayonnaise, are establishing production base in other Asian countries, such as China, Thailand and Indonesia.

Singapore
Japanese cuisine in Singapore began when the first batch of Japanese restaurants opened in the 1960s to cater to Japanese businessmen. As Singaporeans became increasingly well-travelled, local diners started developing a deeper appreciation for Japanese cuisine's subtleties. This led to the transformation of Japanese food in Singapore from a niche expatriate dining scene  to a diverse ecosystem of more than 1,000 Japanese restaurants today. [2]
From sushi bars to ramen shops, udon houses, yakiniku, teppanyaki, wagyu beef restaurants and more [3], Singapore offers one of the most comprehensive Japanese dining experiences outside of Japan itself [4]. The Japanese fine dining scene has also flourished, with numerous omakase restaurants gaining recognition, such as Wakuda and the Michelin-starred Waku Ghin.

Australia
Japanese cuisine is very popular in Australia, and Australians are becoming increasingly familiar with traditional Japanese foods. Restaurants serving Japanese cuisine feature prominently in popular rankings, including Gourmet Traveller and The Good Food Guide.
Sushi in particular has been described as being "as popular as sandwiches", particularly in large cities like Melbourne, Sydney, or Brisbane. As such, sushi bars are a mainstay in shopping centre food courts, and are extremely common in cities and towns all over the country.

Brazil
In Brazil, Japanese food is widespread due to the large Japanese-Brazilian population living in the country, which represents the largest Japanese community living outside Japan. Over the past years, many restaurant chains such as Koni Store have opened, selling typical dishes such as the popular temaki. Yakisoba, which is readily available in all supermarkets, and often included in non-Japanese restaurant menus.

Canada
In Canada, Japanese cuisine has become quite popular. Sushi, sashimi, and instant ramen are highly popular at opposite ends of the income scale, with instant ramen being a common low-budget meal. Sushi and sashimi takeout began in Vancouver and Toronto, and is now common throughout Canada. The largest supermarket chains all carry basic sushi and sashimi, and Japanese ingredients and instant ramen are readily available in most supermarkets. Most mid-sized mall food courts feature fast-food teppan cooking. Izakaya restaurants have surged in popularity. Higher-end ramen restaurants (as opposed to instant ramen noodles of variable quality) are increasingly common.

Indonesia
In the ASEAN region, Indonesia is the second largest market for Japanese food, after Thailand. Japanese cuisine has been increasingly popular as a result of the growing Indonesian middle-class expecting higher quality foods. This has also contributed to the fact that Indonesia has large numbers of Japanese expatriates. The main concern is the issue of many traditional Japanese recipes not being halal. As a Muslim majority country, Indonesians expect that Japanese foods served there are halal according to Islamic dietary law, which means no pork or alcohol are allowed. Japanese restaurants in Indonesia often offer a set menu which includes rice served with an array of Japanese favourites in a single setting. A set menu might include a choice of yakiniku or sukiyaki, including a sample of sushi, tempura, gyoza and miso soup. Authentic Japanese style izakaya and ramen shops can be found in the Little Tokyo (Melawai) area in Blok M, South Jakarta, serving both Japanese expats and local clienteles. Today, Japanese restaurants can be found in most major Indonesian cities, with a high concentration in Greater Jakarta area, Bandung, Surabaya and Bali.
In some cases, Japanese cuisine in Indonesia is often altered to suit Indonesian taste. Hoka Hoka Bento in particular is an Indonesian-owned Japanese fast food restaurant chain that caters to the Indonesian clientele. As a result, the foods served there have been adapted to suit Indonesians' taste. Examples of the change include stronger flavours compared to the authentic subtle Japanese taste, the preference for fried food, as well as the addition of sambal to cater to the Indonesians' preference for hot and spicy food.

Japanese food popularity also has penetrated street food culture, as modest Warjep or Warung Jepang (Japanese food stall) offer Japanese food such as tempura, okonomiyaki and takoyaki, at moderately low prices. Today, okonomiyaki and takoyaki are popular street fare in Jakarta and other Indonesian cities. This is also pushed further by the Japanese convenience stores operating in Indonesia, such as 7-Eleven and Lawson offering Japanese favourites such as oden, chicken katsu (deep-fried chicken cutlet), chicken teriyaki and onigiri.
Some chefs in Indonesian sushi establishments have created a Japanese-Indonesian fusion cuisine, such as krakatau roll, gado-gado roll, rendang roll and gulai ramen. The idea of fusion cuisine melding spicy Indonesian Padang and Japanese cuisine was combined because both cuisine traditions are well-liked by Indonesians. Nevertheless, some of these Japanese eating establishments might strive to serve authentic Japanese cuisine abroad. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Indonesia, such as Yoshinoya gyūdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Ajisen Ramen restaurant chain.

Mexico
In Mexico, certain Japanese restaurants have created what is known as "sushi Mexicano", in which spicy sauces and ingredients accompany the dish or are integrated in sushi rolls. The habanero and serrano chiles have become nearly standard and are referred to as chiles toreados, as they are fried, diced and tossed over a dish upon request.

Philippines
In the Philippines, Japanese cuisine is also popular among the local population. The Philippines have been exposed to the influences from the Japanese, Indian and Chinese. The cities of Davao and Metro Manila probably have the most Japanese influence in the country. The popular dining spots for Japanese nationals are located in Makati, which is called as "Little Tokyo", a small area filled with restaurants specializing in different types of Japanese food. Some of the best Japanese no-frills restaurants in the Philippines can be found in Makati's "Little Tokyo" area. In the Philippines, Halo-halo is derived from Japanese Kakigori. Halo-halo is believed to be an indigenized version of the Japanese kakigori class of desserts, originating from pre-war Japanese migrants into the islands. The earliest versions were composed only of cooked red beans or mung beans in crushed ice with sugar and milk, a dessert known locally as "mongo-ya". Over the years, more native ingredients were added, resulting in the development of the modern halo-halo. Some authors specifically attribute it to the 1920s or 1930s Japanese migrants in the Quinta Market of Quiapo, Manila, due to its proximity to the now defunct Insular Ice Plant, which was the source of the city's ice supply. 
In Cebu City, the Little Kyoto district enables people to experience the feel of being in Kyoto, Japan with a statue of the reclining Buddha overlooking the city. The Little Kyoto district also features Japanese food stalls serving various Japanese dishes like Takoyaki, Tempura, and various other Japanese cuisine that is enjoyed by the people of Cebu City, Philippines. Odong, also called pancit odong, is a Visayan noodle soup made with odong noodles, canned smoked sardines (tinapa) in tomato sauce, bottle gourd (upo), loofah (patola), chayote, ginger, garlic, red onions, and various other vegetables. It is garnished and spiced with black pepper, scallions, toasted garlic, calamansi, or labuyo chilis. The dish is usually prepared as a soup, but it can also be cooked with minimal water, in which case, it is known as odong guisado.
It is a common simple and cheap meal in Mindanao (particularly the Davao Region) and the Visayas Islands. It is almost always eaten with white rice, rarely on its own.
It is named after the round flour noodles called odong which are closest in texture and taste to the Okinawa soba. These noodles are characteristically sold dried into straight sticks around 6 to 8 in (15 to 20 cm) long. The name is derived from the Japanese udon noodles, although it does not use udon noodles or bear any resemblance to udon dishes. It originates from the Davao Region of Mindanao which had a large Japanese migrant community in the early 1900s. The odong noodles were previously locally manufactured by Okinawans, but modern odong noodles (which are distinctly yellowish) are imported from China. Because odong noodles are difficult to find in other regions, they can be substituted with other types of noodles; including misua, miki (egg noodles), udon, and even instant noodles.

Taiwan
Japan and Taiwan have shared close historical and cultural relations. Dishes such as sushi, ramen, and donburi are very popular among locals. Japanese chain restaurants such as Coco Ichibanya, Ippudo, Kura Sushi, Marugame Seimen, Mister Donut, MOS Burger, Ootoya, Ramen Kagetsu Arashi, Saizeriya, Sukiya, Sushiro, Tonkatsu Shinjuku Saboten, Yayoi Ken, and Yoshinoya, can all be found in Taiwan, among others. Taiwan has adapted many Japanese food items. Tianbula ("Taiwanese tempura") is actually satsuma-age and was introduced to Taiwan during Japanese rule by people from Kyushu, where the word tempura is commonly used to refer to satsuma-age. It is popular as a night market snack and as an ingredient for oden, hot pot and lu wei. Taiwanese versions of oden are sold locally as olen or, more recently, as guandongzhu (from Japanese Kantō-ni) in convenience stores.

Thailand
In Southeast Asia, Thailand is the largest market for Japanese food. This is partly because Thailand is a popular tourist destination, having large numbers of Japanese expatriates, as well as the local population having developed a taste for authentic Japanese cuisine. According to the Organisation that Promote Japanese Restaurants Abroad (JRO), the number of Japanese restaurants in Thailand jumped about 2.2-fold from 2007's figures to 1,676 in June 2012. In Bangkok, Japanese restaurants accounts for 8.3 percent of all restaurants, following those that serve Thai. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Thailand, such as Yoshinoya gyūdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Kourakuen ramen restaurant chain.

United Kingdom
Japanese food Inspired restaurant chains in the UK include Wagamama, YO! Sushi, Nudo Sushi Box, Wasabi, Bone Daddies and Kokoro, often localising the food and mixing in other ingredients originating from Southeast Asia and India.

United States
The California roll has been influential in sushi's global popularity; its invention often credited to a Japanese-born chef working in Los Angeles, with dates assigned to 1973, or even 1964. The dish has been snubbed by some purist sushi chefs, and also likened to the American-born chop suey by one scholar.
As of 2015 the country has about 4,200 sushi restaurants. It is one of the most popular styles of sushi in the US market. Japanese cuisine is an integral part of food culture in Hawaii as well as in other parts of the United States. Popular items are sushi, sashimi, and teriyaki. Kamaboko, known locally as fish cake, is a staple of saimin, a noodle soup that is a local favorite in Hawaii. Sushi, long regarded as quite exotic in the west until the 1970s, has become a popular health food in parts of North America, Western Europe and Asia.
Two of the first Japanese restaurants in the United States were Saito and Nippon. Restaurants such as these popularized dishes such as sukiyaki and tempura, while Nippon was the first restaurant in Manhattan to have a dedicated sushi bar. Nippon was also one of the first Japanese restaurants in the U.S. to grow and process their own soba and responsible for creation of the now standard beef negimayaki dish.
In the U.S., teppanyaki "iron hot plate" cooking restaurants took foothold. Such restaurants featured steak, shrimp and vegetables (including bean sprouts), cooked in front of the customer on a "teppanyaki grill" (teppan) by a personal chef who turns cooking into performance art, twirling and juggling cutting knives like batons. The meal would be served with steamed rice and Japanese  soup. This style of cooking was made popular in the U.S. when Rocky Aoki founded his popular restaurant chain Benihana in 1964. In Japan this type of cooking is thought to be American food, but in the U.S. it is thought to be Japanese. Aoki thought this would go over better in the U.S. than traditional Japanese cuisine because he felt that Americans enjoyed "eating in exotic surroundings, but are deeply mistrustful of exotic foods".

Food controversies
Some elements of Japanese cuisine involving eating live seafood, such as Ikizukuri and Odori ebi, have received criticism overseas as a form of animal cruelty.
Japanese cuisine is heavily dependent on seafood products. About 45 kilograms of seafood are consumed per capita annually in Japan, more than most other developed countries. An aspect of environmental concern is Japanese appetite for seafood, which could contribute to the depletion of natural ocean resources. For example, Japan consumes 80% of the global supply of blue fin tuna, a popularly sought sushi and sashimi ingredient, which could lead to its extinction due to commercial overfishing. Another environmental concern is commercial whaling and the consumption of whale meat, for which Japan is the world's largest market.

See also
References
Works cited
Further reading
Cwiertka, Katarzyna Joanna (2006). Modern Japanese Cuisine: Food, Power And National Identity. Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-298-0.
Francks, Penelope. "Diet and the comparison of living standards across the Great Divergence: Japanese food history in an English mirror." Journal of Global History 14.1 (2019): 3-21.
Rath, Eric C. (2010). Food and Fantasy in Early Modern Japan. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-26227-0.

External links
JAPANESE CUISINE COMPLETE Japanese Culinary Academy, Kyoto Prefectual University

## List of museums in Japan
This is a list of museums in Japan.
As of October 2018, there were 5,738 museums in Japan. This total comprises, in line with the Museum Act, 914 registered museums, 372 designated museum-equivalent facilities, and 4,452 museum-like facilities.

By region and prefecture
Hokkaidō
Registered museums
As of 1 November 2019, and in line with the Museum Act, there were forty-five registered museums in Hokkaidō:

Abashiri City Folk Museum
Abashiri City Museum of Art
Abashiri Prison Museum
Akkeshi Maritime Affairs Memorial Museum
Arai Memorial Museum of Art
Asahikawa City Museum
Asahikawa Museum of Sculpture in Honour of Nakahara Teijirō
Asahikawa Science Center
Bihoro Museum
Date City Museum of History and Culture
Hakodate City Museum
Hakodate Jōmon Culture Center
Hakodate Museum of Art, Hokkaidō
Hidaka Mountains Museum
Hiroo Town Marine Museum
Hokkaidō Asahikawa Museum of Art
Hokkaidō Museum of Literature
Hokkaidō Museum of Modern Art
Hokkaidō Museum of Northern Peoples
Hokkaidō Obihiro Museum of Art
Kan Yasuda Sculpture Museum – Arte Piazza Bibai
Kitaichi Venetian Art Museum
Kitami Region Museum of Science History and Art
Kushiro Art Museum, Hokkaidō
Kushiro City Museum
Kushiro City Museum of Art
Migishi Kōtarō Museum of Art, Hokkaidō
Mikasa City Museum
Miura Ayako Literature Museum
Monbetsu City Museum
Mukawa Town Hobetsu Museum
Nayoro City Kitaguni Museum
Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum
Obihiro Centennial City Museum
Otaru City General Museum
Otaru City Museum of Art
Otaru City Museum of Literature
Rishiri Town Museum
Sapporo Science Center
Shibetsu City Museum
Shinhidaka Town Museum
Tomakomai Art Museum
Tomakomai City Science Center
Urakawa Town Museum
Shiretoko Museum

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 10 February 2015, in line with the Museum Act, there were twenty-one designated museum-equivalent facilities in Hokkaidō:

Akkeshi Marine Station Field Science Center for Northern Biosphere, Hokkaidō University
Asahikawa Tondenhei Village Museum
Chitose Salmon Aquarium
Field Science Center for Northern Biosphere, Hokkaidō University
Fukuhara Memorial Museum
Historical Village of Hokkaidō
Hongō Shin Memorial Museum of Sculpture, Sapporo
Kushiro Children's Museum
Lake Utonai Sanctuary Nature Center
Muroran City Youth Science Museum
Muroran Folklore and Historic Museum
Nemuro City Museum of History and Nature
Noboribetsu Marine Park Nixe
Noboribetsu Bear Park
Obihiro Zoo
Otaru Aquarium
Sapporo Art Museum
Sapporo Maruyama Zoo
Sendai Clan, Shiraoi Manor House Museum
Kanda Nisshō Memorial Museum of Art
Yūbari Coal Mine Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc.
These include:

Chūrui Naumann Elephant Museum
Edwin Dun Memorial Museum
Ebetsu City Historical Museum
Ebetsu Glass Crafts Museum
Eniwa City Historical Museum
Esashi Town Historical Museum
Hakodate City Museum of Literature
Hakodate City Museum of Northern Peoples
Historical Museum of the Saru River
Hokkaidō Archaeological Operations Center
Hokkaidō Museum
Hokkaidō Railway Technology Museum
Hokkaidō University Botanical Gardens
Hokkaidō University Museum
Hokuchin Memorial Museum
Hokuto City Hometown Museum
Ishikari City Hamamasu Folk Museum
Kayano Shigeru Nibutani Ainu Museum
Kikonai Town Museum
Kitami Mint Memorial Museum
Matsumae Town Historical Museum
Miyanomori Art Museum
Museum of Soils and Ploughs of the World
Nanae Historical Museum
National Ainu Museum
Okhotsk Museum Esashi
Otaru Music Box Museum
Pierson Memorial House
Rausu Municipal Museum
Rebun Town Historical Museum
Sapporo Beer Museum
Sapporo Buried Cultural Property Center
Shellfish Museum of Rankoshi
Shibetsu Salmon Science Museum
Shinhidaka Ainu Museum
Shintotsukawa Town Historical Museum
Taiho Sumo Museum
Takikawa Local History Museum
Takikawa Museum of Art and Natural History
Urahoro Town Museum
Wakkanai Karafuto Museum
Yakumo Town Museum
Yasushi Inoue Memorial Hall
Yoichi Fisheries Museum

Former museums
Former museums include:

Ainu Museum

Tōhoku
Aomori Prefecture
Registered museums
As of 31 March 2020, in line with the Museum Act, there were three registered museums in Aomori Prefecture:

Aomori Prefectural Museum
Hachinohe City Museum
Hirosaki City Museum

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 31 March 2020, in line with the Museum Act, there was one designated museum-equivalent facility in Aomori Prefecture:

Aomori Museum of Art

Museum-like facilities
As of 31 March 2020, and as listed by the Aomori Prefectural Government, there were eighty-four museum-like facilities in Aomori Prefecture, including:

Aomori City Forestry Museum
Aomori City Mediaeval Museum (Chūsei no Yakata)
Aomori Museum of History
Hakkōda Mountains Incident Museum
Hirosaki Castle Botanical Gardens
Hirosaki Castle Museum
Hirosaki City Local Literature Museum
Korekawa Archaeological Institution (Korekawa Jōmon Kan)
Kushihiki Hachiman-gū Museum of National Treasures
Dazai Osamu Memorial Museum
Misawa Aviation & Science Museum
Munakata Shikō Memorial Museum of Art
Sanmaru Museum
Takayama Uichi Memorial Museum of Art
Terayama Shūji Memorial Museum
Takaoka no Mori Historical Museum of Hirosaki Clan
Towada Art Center
Tsugaru-han Neputa Village
Tsugaru Kokeshi Museum

Other related facilities
Andō Shōeki Museum
Nebuta Museum Wa Rasse
Nitobe Memorial Museum
Tachineputa Museum

Former museums
Hachinohe City Museum of Art

Iwate Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Goshono Jōmon Museum
Hanamaki City Museum
Hekishōji Museum
Iwate Museum of Art
Iwate Prefectural Museum
Kitakami City Museum
Miyazawa Kenji Memorial Museum
Ōfunato City Museum
Ōshū City Cattle Museum
Tōno City Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Hachimantai City Museum
Satō Hachirō Memorial Museum
Hanamaki City Museum of History and Folklore
Hara Kei Memorial Museum
Ichinoseki City Museum
Ishikawa Takuboku Memorial Museum
Kikuta Kazuo Memorial Museum
Michinoku Folk Village
Mifune Kyūzō Memorial Museum
Morioka History and Culture Museum
Stone and Kenji Museum
Toneyama Kōjin Memorial Art Museum
Tōno Folktale Museum

Miyagi Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Aoba Castle Museum
Fukushima Art Museum
The Miyagi Museum of Art
Ōsaki City Matsuyama Furusato History Museum
Rias Ark Museum of Art
Rikuzentakata City Museum
Sendai City Museum
Kami Town Serisawa Chōsuke Tōhoku Ceramic Culture Museum
Tōhoku Gakuin University Museum
Tōhoku History Museum
Tōhoku Fukushi University Serizawa Keisuke Art and Craft Museum
Zuigan-ji Treasure Hall Seiryūden

Museum-like facilities, etc
3M Sendai Science Museum
Bansui Sōdō
Botanical Garden of Tōhoku University
Daigigakoi Shell Mound Museum
Fujita Kyōhei Museum of Glass
Hara Asao Memorial Museum
Ishinomori Manga Museum
Ishinomori Shōtarō Furusato Memorial Museum
Kankaku Museum
Kanno Museum of Art
Kanrantei & Matsushima Museum
Kazenosawa Museum
Kesennuma City Ōtani Mine History Museum
Museum of Kamei Collection
Nakamoto Seishi Contemporary Art Museum
Ōhira-mura Furusato Museum of Art
Police Museum
Saitō Garden Museum
Sannō-Gakoi Site Museum
Satohama Shell Mound & Historical Museum of Jōmon Village, Oku-Matsushima
Satoru Satō Art Museum
Sendai Astronomical Observatory
Sendai City Tomizawa Site Museum
Sendai City War Reconstruction Memorial Hall
Sendai City Wild Plants Garden
Sendai Kaleidoscope Museum
Sendai Literature Museum
Shiogama Jinja Museum
Shiogama Sugimura Jun Museum of Art
Tanabata Museum
Tōhoku University Museum
Tome City History Museum
Toyoma Education Museum
Zuihōden Museum

Akita Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Akita Museum of Art
Akita Museum of Modern Art
Akita Prefectural Museum
Akita Senshū Museum of Art
Kitaakita City Hamabe no Uta Music Hall
Kosaka Town Museum
Omono River Local Museum
Polder Museum of Ōgata-Mura

Museum-like facilities, etc
Mining Museum of Akita University
Ōmura Museum of Art
Satake Historical Museum
Yokote Masuda Manga Museum

Yamagata
Abumiya
Chidō Museum
Chidōkan (Tsuruoka)
Dewazakura Museum of Art
Domon Ken Photography Museum
Homma Museum of Art
Kaminoyama Castle
Matsuoka Kaikonjo
Mogami Yoshiaki Historical Museum
Sakata City Museum of Art
Yamadera Basho Memorial Museum
Yamagata Museum of Art
Yamagata Prefectural Museum
Yonezawa City Uesugi Museum

Fukushima
Aizuwakamatsu Castle
Fukushima Museum
Fukushima Prefectural Museum of Art
Iwaki City Archaeological Museum
Kōriyama City Museum of Art
Morohashi Museum of Modern Art
Picture Book Museum, Iwaki City
Takizawa Honjin

Kantō
Ibaraki
Ibaraki Prefectural Museum of History
Science Museum of Map and Survey
Tenshin Memorial Museum of Art, Ibaraki
Geological Museum (Japan)
Tsukuba Space Center

Tochigi
Bandai Museum
Honda Collection Hall
Kurita Museum
Utsunomiya Museum of Art
Tochigi Prefectural Museum
Tochigi Prefectural Museum of Fine Arts

Gunma
Asama Volcano Museum
Gunma Insect World
The Museum of Modern Art, Gunma
Okawa Museum of Art
Usui Pass Railway Heritage Park

Saitama
Hachigata Castle
John Lennon Museum
Railway Museum (Saitama)
Saitama Prefectural Museum of the Sakitama Ancient Burial Mounds
Tokorozawa Aviation Museum

Chiba
Chiba Museum of Science and Industry
Hoki Museum
Kawamura Memorial DIC Museum of Art
Kururi Castle
National Museum of Japanese History
Ōtaki Castle (Chiba)
Sekiyado Castle
Tateyama Castle

Tokyo
Kanagawa
Hakone Open-Air Museum
Hara Model Railway Museum
Japan Coast Guard Museum Yokohama
Japanese battleship Mikasa
Kamakura Museum of Literature
Kamakura Museum of National Treasures
Kanazawa Bunko
Lalique Museum Hakone
Museum of Tin Toys
Nihon Minka-en
Nissan Engine Museum
Number Nine Research Laboratory
NYK Maritime Museum
Odawara Castle
Pola Museum of Art
Shin-Yokohama Raumen Museum
Taro Okamoto Museum of Art
Toshiba Science Institute
Yamate Museum
Yokohama Archives of History
Yokohama Customs Museum
Yokohama History Museum
Yokohama Museum of Art
Yokohama Port Museum
Yokohama Science Center
Yokohama Silk Museum

Chūbu
Niigata
Former Niigata Customs House
Joetsu aquarium
Niigata City History Museum
Niigata Prefectural Museum of History
Northern Culture Museum

Toyama
Museum of Modern Art, Toyama
Toyama Castle

Ishikawa
21st Century Museum of Contemporary Art
Ishikawa Aviation Plaza
Ishikawa Nanao Art Museum
Ishikawa Prefectural History Museum
Ishikawa Prefectural Museum of Art
Ishikawa Prefectural Museum of Traditional Arts and Crafts
Kanazawa Phonograph Museum
Kanazawa Yasue Gold Leaf Museum
Kanazawa Yuwaku Yumeji-kan Museum
Murō Saisei Memorial Museum
Nippon Origami Museum
Notojima Aquarium

Fukui
Brief Messages from the Heart Museum
Fukui Fine Arts Museum
Fukui Prefectural Dinosaur Museum
Fukui Prefectural Museum of Cultural History
Fukui Prefectural Varve Museum
Maruoka Castle
Tsuruga Municipal Museum
Port of Humanity Tsuruga Museum
Wakasa Mikata Jōmon Museum

Yamanashi
Kiyosato Museum of Photographic Arts
Maizuru Castle Park
Nakamura Keith Haring Collection
Yamanashi Prefectural Museum
Yamanashi Science Museum

Nagano
Hijiri Museum
Japan Ukiyo-e Museum
Jōkyō Gimin Memorial Museum
Kaichi School Museum
Kitano Museum of Art
Lake Nojiri Naumann Elephant Museum
Matsumoto Castle
Matsushiro Literary and Military School
Saku Children's Science Dome for the Future
Sunritz Hattori Museum of Arts
Togariishi Museum of Jōmon Archaeology

Gifu
Cormorant Fishing House
Eizō & Tōichi Katō Memorial Art Museum
Enkū Museum
Gifu Castle
Gifu City Museum of History
Gifu City Science Museum
Gifu Prefectural Museum
Hida Minzoku Mura Folk Village
Hikaru Memorial Hall
Museum of Fine Arts, Gifu
Nawa Insect Museum
Ōgaki Castle
Ōta-juku Nakasendō Museum
Solar Ark
Sunomata Castle

Shizuoka
Arai Barrier
Hamamatsu Castle
Kakegawa Castle
MOA Museum of Art
Sano Art Museum
Shijimizuka site
Shizuoka Prefectural Museum of Art
Toi Gold Museum
Uehara Museum of Modern Art
Yokosuka Castle

Former museums
Sakuma Rail Park

Aichi
Aichi Arts Center
Aichi Prefectural Ceramic Museum
Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Money Museum
Electricity Museum, Nagoya
Hekinan aquarium
Inuyama Castle
International Design Centre Nagoya
Iwasaki Castle
Japan Spinning Top Museum
Kiyosu Castle
Koromo Castle
Little World Museum of Man
Masamura Pachinko Museum
Meiji Mura
Nagoya Castle
Nagoya City Art Museum
Nagoya City Museum
Nagoya City Science Museum
Nagoya City Tram & Subway Museum
Nagoya Noh Theater
Nagoya/Boston Museum of Fine Arts
Nishio Castle
Noritake Garden
Okazaki Castle
SCMaglev and Railway Park
Tahara Castle
Tokugawa Art Museum
Toyohashi City Museum Art and History
Toyota Automobile Museum
Toyota Commemorative Museum of Industry and Technology
Toyota Municipal Museum of Art
Yoshida Castle

Kansai
Mie
Chōkaidō Museum
Iga Ueno Castle
Iga-ryū Ninja Museum
Natsumi Temple complex
Sagawa Memorial Museum of Shinto and Japanese Culture, Kogakkan University
Saikū

Shiga
Hikone Castle
Kawara Museum
Miho Museum
Minakuchi Castle
Nagahama Castle
Sagawa Art Museum
Lake Biwa Museum

Kyoto
Asahi beer Oyamazaki Villa Museum of Art
Fukuchiyama Castle
Koryo Museum of Art
Kyoto Art Center
Kyoto City History Museum
Kyoto International Manga Museum
Kyoto Municipal Museum of Art
Kyoto Museum for World Peace
Kyoto National Museum
National Museum of Modern Art, Kyoto
Nintendo Museum
Ōkōchi Sansō
Ryozen Museum of History
Sen-oku Hakuko Kan
The Tale of Genji Museum
Umekoji Steam Locomotive Museum

Osaka
Abeno Harukas Art Museum
CupNoodles Museum Osaka Ikeda
Fujita Art Museum
Itsuō Art Museum
Kishiwada Castle
Kubosō Memorial Museum of Arts, Izumi
Liberty Osaka
Masaki Art Museum
Modern Transportation Museum
Momofuku Ando Instant Ramen Museum
Museum of Oriental Ceramics, Osaka
National Museum of Art, Osaka
National Museum of Ethnology (Japan)
Osaka Castle
Osaka City Museum of Fine Arts
Osaka Contemporary Art Center
Osaka International Peace Center
Osaka Maritime Museum
Osaka Museum of History
Osaka Museum of Natural History
Osaka Prefectural Chikatsu Asuka Museum
Osaka Science Museum
Sakai City Museum
Yuki Museum of Art

Former museums
Osaka City Museum

Hyōgo
Hakutsuru Fine Art Museum
Hyōgo Prefectural Museum of Art
Kobe Anpanman Children's Museum & Mall
Kobe City Museum
Kobe City Museum of Literature
Kobe Maritime Museum
Takenaka Carpentry Tools Museum

Nara
Registered museums
There are fourteen registered museums:

The City Museum of Gojō Culture
Daiki Osyou Folk Craft Museum
Kashiba Municipal Nijōsan Museum
Kashihara City Museum of History
Kashihara City Museum of Insects
Kasuga Taisha Kokuhōden
Kasuga Taisha Manyō Botanical Garden
Katsuragi City History Museum
Kita Museum of Art
The Museum, Archaeological Institute of Kashihara, Nara Prefecture
Nakano Museum of Art
Neiraku Museum
Shōhaku Art Museum
Suiheisha Museum

Museum-equivalent facilities
There are six museum-equivalent facilities:

Hōryū-ji Daihōzōden
The Museum of Tezukayama University
The Museum Yamato Bunkakan
Nara University Museum
Takamatsuzuka Mural Hall
Tenri University Sankōkan Museum

Other museums and museum-like facilities
Asuka Historical Museum
Irie Taikichi Memorial Museum of Photography Nara City
Karako-Kagi Archaeological Museum
Nara City Historical Materials Preservation House
Nara Municipal Buried Cultural Properties Research Centre
Nara National Museum
Nara Palace Site Museum
Nara Prefecture Complex of Man'yo Culture
Nara Prefectural Museum of Art
Nara Prefectural Museum of Folklore
Tomimoto Kenkichi Memorial Museum

Wakayama
Kushimoto Turkish Memorial and Museum
Wakayama Castle
Wakayama City Museum
Wakayama Prefectural Museum
Wakayama Prefecture Kii-fudoki-no-oka Museum of Archaeology and Folklore

Chūgoku
Tottori Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Kurayoshi Museum
Tottori City Historical Museum
Tottori Folk Crafts Museum
Tottori Prefectural Museum
Watanabe Art Museum
Yonago City Museum of Art

Museum-like facilities, etc
Aoyakamiji Site Exhibition Hall
Aoya Local Museum
Aoyama Gōshō Furusatokan
Aoya Washi Workshop
Asia Museum - Inoue Yasushi Memorial Museum
Chiisana Yume Art Museum
Daisen-ji Hōmotsukan Reihōkaku
Daisen Museum of Nature and History
Enchō-en Chinese Garden
Enkei Theater Kurayoshi Figure Museum
Hiezu Village Folk Museum
Hino Town Museum of History and Folklore
Hōjō History and Folklore Museum
Hōki Sangaku Art Museum
Hyōnosen Nature Museum, Hibikinomori
Ikemoto Yoshimi Little Museum Of Photography
Inaba Man-yō History Pavilion
Ishitani Residence
Japan-Korea Friendship Museum
Jinsho no Yakata
Jinpūkaku
Kameda Masakazu Memorial Museum
Kamiyodo Hakuhō-no-Oka Exhibition Hall
Kōfu Town Museum of History and Folklore
Kotoura Lifelong Learning Center
Kurayoshi Line Railway Memorial Museum
Misasa Violin Museum
Mizuki Shigeru Memorial Museum
Mount Oshiroyama Observation Deck Kawahara Castle
Nagashibina Doll Museum
Nichinan Town Art Museum
Nishikawa Katsumi Film Museum
Saji Astro Park
Mitokusan Sanbutsu-ji Treasure Hall
Sand Museum
San'in Kaigan Geopark Museum of the Earth and Sea
Shiotani Teikō Memorial Photo Gallery
Tottori College Kasuri Museum
Tottori Hanakairō Flower Park
Tottori Nijisseiki Pear Museum
Tottori Prefectural Buried Cultural Property Center
Tottori Prefectural Muki Banda Historic Site Park
Ueda Shōji Museum of Photography
Umi to Kurashi no Shiryōkan
Wakasa Kyōdo Bunka-no-Sato
Warabekan
Yonago City Fukuichi Archaeology Museum
Municipal Yonago Historical Museum
Yonago San'in Historical Museum
Yonago Waterbirds Sanctuary
Yukamuri Gallery - Osaki Midori Museum
Yumeminato Tower
Yurihama Town Hawai History and Folklore Museum
Yūsei Museum

Shimane
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Abe Eishirō Memorial Museum
Adachi Museum of Art
Hamada Children's Museum of Art
Hirata Honjin Memorial Museum
Imaoka Art Museum
Itohara Memorial Museum
Iwami Adachi Art Museum
Iwami Art Museum
Izumo Taisha Hōmotsuden
Kabeya Shūseikan
Kamei History Hall
Kanō Art Museum
Matsue History Museum
Sekishō Art Museum
Shimane Art Museum
Shimane Museum of Ancient Izumo
Tanabe Art Museum
Tezen Museum
Wakō Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Ama Town Gotobain Museum
Anno Mitsumasa Art Museum
Hamada Local History Museum
Hanzake Nature Museum of Mizuho
Imai Museum
Iwami Ginzan Museum
Izumo Cultural Heritage Museum
Izumo Folk Crafts Museum
Izumo Science Center
Izumo Tamatsukuri Museum
Izumo Yayoi-no-Mori Museum
Kōjindani Archaeological Museum
Lafcadio Hearn Memorial Museum
Matsue Castle
Nakamura Hajime Memorial Museum
Nima Sand Museum
Oki Kyōdokan
Okuizumo Tane Museum of Natural History
Okuizumo Tatara Sword Museum
Sanbe-Azukihara Buried Forest Park
Sesshū Memorial Museum
Shimane Prefectural Sanbe Nature Museum Sahimeru
Shimane Prefectural Yakumotatsu Fudoki-no-Oka Museum
Tsuwano Japan Heritage Centre
Yunotsu Yakimono no Sato

Okayama
Bizen Traditional Industry Hall, located in Imbe Station
Okayama Prefecture Bizen Ceramics Museum
Hayashibara Museum of Art
Kawasaki Medical School
Nagi Museum Of Contemporary Art
Ohara Museum of Art
Okayama Castle
Okayama Orient Museum
Okayama Prefectural Museum
Okayama Prefectural Museum of Art
Tsuyama Railroad Educational Museum
Yumeji Art Museum

Hiroshima Prefecture
Registered museums
As of 31 January 2019, and in line with the Museum Act, there were twenty-eight registered museums in Hiroshima Prefecture:

Akitakata City History and Folk Museum
Fukuyama Auto & Clock Museum
Fukuyama Castle Museum
Fukuyama City Shinichi Museum of History and Folklore
Fukuyama Museum of Art
Hirayama Ikuo Museum of Art
Hiroshima Castle
Hiroshima Children's Museum
Hiroshima City Ebayama Museum of Meteorology
Hiroshima City Museum of Contemporary Art
Hiroshima City Museum of History and Traditional Crafts
Hiroshima City Transportation Museum
Hiroshima Museum of Art
Hiroshima Prefectural Art Museum
Hiroshima Prefectural History and Folklore Museum
Hiroshima Prefectural Museum of History
Hiwa Natural Science Museum
Itsukushima Jinja Hōmotsukan
Izumi Museum of Art
Kōsan-ji Museum
Kure Municipal Museum of Art
Onomichi City Museum of Art
Rai San'yō Historic Site Museum
Shibuya Art Museum
Taishaku Gorge Museum Jiyūkan
Takehara Museum of Art
Umi-Mori Art Museum
Wood One Museum of Art

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 31 January 2019, and in line with the Museum Act, there were five designated museum-equivalent facilities in Hiroshima Prefecture:

Fude-no-Sato Kōbō
Fukuyama City Zoo
Hiroshima City Asa Zoological Park
Hiroshima University Museum
Miyajima Public Aquarium

Museum-like facilities, etc
Atatajima Lighthouse Museum
Fukuromachi Elementary School Peace Museum
Fukuyama City Human Rights Peace Museum
Fukuyama City Kannabe Historical Folklore Museum
Fukuyama City Tomonoura Museum of History and Folklore
Fukuyama Museum of Literature
Health Sciences Museum
Higashihiroshima City Museum of Art
Hiroshima Botanical Garden
Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum
Hiroshima Teishin Hospital Former Outpatients Ward Exhibition Room
Holocaust Education Center
Hon'inbō Shūsaku Igo Memorial Museum
Honkawa Elementary School Peace Museum
Innoshima Flower Center
Innoshima Suigun Castle
Irifuneyama Memorial Museum
Iroha-maru Tenjikan
Japan Coast Guard Museum
JMSDF Kure Museum
Kuchiwa Historical Museum
Matsunaga Footwear Museum
Mazda Museum
Nakagawa Art Museum
Nakata Museum
Okuda Gensō Sayume Art Museum
Ōkunoshima Poison Gas Museum
Onomichi Film Museum
Onomichi Historical Museum
Onomichi Mansion of Literature
Yachiyo no Oka Museum of Art
Yamato Museum

Former museums
Glass Village (Garasu no Sato) Museum
Japan Folk Toy and Doll Museum
Japan Footwear Museum

Yamaguchi Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
The Hagi Museum
Hagi Uragami Museum
Iwakuni Art Museum
Iwakuni Chōkokan
Kikkawa Historical Museum
Kumaya Art Museum
Mōri Museum
Nomura Art Museum
Shimonoseki City Archaeological Museum
Shimonoseki City Art Museum
Shimonoseki City Museum of History
Shūnan City Museum of Art and History
Yamaguchi Prefectural Museum
Yamaguchi Prefectural Museum of Art
Yoshika Taiba Memorial Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Hoshino Tetsurō Museum
Kaiten Memorial Museum
Murata Seifū Memorial Museum
Museum of Japanese Emigration to Hawaii
Mutsu Memorial Museum
Nakahara Chūya Memorial Museum
Ube Tokiwa Museum
Yamaguchi Prefectural Government Museum

Shikoku
Tokushima Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Hall of Awa Japanese Handmade Paper
Matsushige Town Museum of History and Folklore - Ningyō Jōruri Theater Museum
Ōtsuka Museum of Art
Tokushima Archaeological Museum
Tokushima Castle Museum
Tokushima Modern Art Museum
Tokushima Prefectural Museum
Tokushima Prefectural Torii Ryūzō Memorial Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Ai no Yakata
Aioi Shinrin Museum of Art
Ataka Museum of Art
Anan Awa Kubō Folk Museum
Awa City Donari Historical Museum
Awa Ikeda Tobacco Museum - Awa Ikeda Udatsu House
Awa Odori Kaikan
Heike Yashiki Museum of Folklore
Hiwasa Chelonian Museum Caretta
Kagawa Toyohiko Memorial Museum
Kaiyō Town Museum
Kawata Folk Museum
Mima Kyōdo Museum
Misato Hotaru Museum
Moraes Museum
Naruto Galle No Mori Art Museum
Naruto German House
Ōnaruto Bridge Memorial Museum
Sūō Art Museum
Tokushima Botanical Garden
Tokushima City Tenguhisa Museum
Tokushima Prefectural Awa Jūrōbe Yashiki
Tokushima Prefectural Buried Cultural Properties Research Centre
Tokushima Prefectural Museum of Literature and Calligraphy
Tokushima Science Museum
Tokushima War Dead Memorial Museum

Kagawa Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Chichū Art Museum
Isamu Noguchi Garden Museum
The Kagawa Museum
Kamada Museum
Kotohira-gū Museum
Shikoku Mura
Takamatsu Art Museum
Takamatsu City Stone Folk Museum
Takamatsu Historical Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
In addition to the above, the following are member museums of the Kagawa Museum Association (香川県資料館協議会):

Araki Kazuo Memorial Folk Tool Museum (Sanuki Senshintei)* Ayagawa Lifelong Learning Center
Henro Exchange Salon
Higashikagawa City History and Folk Museum
Hiraga Gennai Memorial Museum
Ibukijima Folk History Museum
Kagawa Glove Museum
Kagawa Memorial Water Park Water Museum
Kagawa Prefectural Goshikidai Children's Nature Center
Kan'onji City Museum
Kinryō-no-Sato Sake Museum
Kotohira Town History and Folklore Museum
Local Doll Museum
Marugame Museum
Marukin Soy Sauce Museum
Mitoyo City Takuma Town Folk Museum
Mount Shiude Archaeological Museum
Sakaide City Museum
Sakaide City Salt Industry Museum
Sanuki City History and Folk Museum
Sanuki Kokubun-ji Site Museum
Sea Science Museum
Seto Inland Sea Folk History Museum
Seto Ōhashi Memorial Museum
Sōkichi Kawara no Sato Exhibition Hall
Tadotsu Town Museum
Takamatsu City Kōnan History and Folk Museum
Takamatsu Suidō Museum
Toramaru Puppet Theater Museum
Toyohama Folk Museum (Cotton Museum)
Ushiyaguchi Shūkokan
Utazu industrial Museum
World Coin Museum
Yoshima Museum
Zentsūji City Local Folk Museum
Other related facilities include:

Benesse Art Site Naoshima
Benesse House
George Nakashima Memorial Gallery
Kagawa Prefectural Higashiyama Kaii Setouchi Art Museum
Lee Ufan Museum
Marugame Art Museum
Marugame Castle
Marugame Hirai Art Museum
Marugame Inokuma Genichirō Museum of Contemporary Art
Marugame Uchiwa no Minato Museum
Museum of JGSDF Camp Zentsuji
Ozaki Hōsai Memorial Museum
Teshima Art Museum
Teshima Yokoo House
Tsuboi Sakae Museum of Literature
Shodoshima Yokai Art Museum

Ehime Prefecture
Registered museums
As of 1 April 2020, and in line with the Museum Act, there were eighteen registered museums in Ehime Prefecture:

Ehime Bunkakan
Ehime Mingeikan
Ehime Prefectural Science Museum
Ikata Town Museum
Itami Jūzō Memorial Museum
Murakami Kaizoku Museum (also referred to as the Murakami Suigun Museum)
The Museum of Art, Ehime
Museum of Ehime History and Culture
Niihama City Museum of Art
Ōmishima Maritime Museum
Ōmishima Museum of Art Honkan
Ōmishima Museum of Art Annex: Iwata Ken Mother and Child Museum, Imabari City
Ōmishima Museum of Art Annex: Tokoro Museum Ōmishima
Ōyamazumi Jinja Hōmotsukan
Ōzu City Museum
Shiki Memorial Museum
Tōon City Museum of History and Folklore
Uwajima City Date Museum

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 1 April 2020, and in line with the Museum Act, there were six designated museum-equivalent facilities in Ehime Prefecture:

Kuma Museum of Art
Hirose Memorial Museum
Saijō City Saijō Folk Museum
Saka no Ue no Kumo Museum
Takabatake Kashō Taishō Roman-kan
Tobe Zoological Park of Ehime Prefecture

Museum-like facilities, etc
Akagane Museum
Besshi Copper Mine Memorial Museum
Ehime Prefectural Lifelong Learning Center
Ehime University Museum
Higurashi Villa Memorial Museum
Ikazaki Kite Museum
Imabari City Kōno Museum of Art
Itō Toyoo Museum of Architecture, Imabari
Kaimei School
Kawara-kan
Kubota Palm Garden
Matsuyama Archaeological Museum
Murakami Santō Memorial Museum
Omogo Mountain Museum
Paper Museum
Railway History Park, Saijō
Shikokuchūō City Museum of History and Archaeology
Tamagawa Museum of Modern Art, Imabari
Tobe Ware Traditional Industry Hall
Towel Museum Ichihiro
Uwajima City Historical Museum

Kōchi Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Aki City Calligraphy Museum
Aki City Museum of History and Folklore
Kami City Art Museum
Kami City Takashi Yanase Memorial Hall & Anpanman Museum
Kochi Liberty and People's Rights Museum
Kōchi Prefectural Museum of History
Katsurahama aquarium
Muroto Schoolhouse Aquarium
The Museum of Art, Kōchi
Ryūga Cave Museum
Sakawa Town Aoyama Bunko
Sukumo City History Museum
Yokoyama Memorial Manga Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Ekin Museum
Former Yamauchi Residence
Ino Paper Museum
Kōchi Castle
Kōchi Castle Museum of History
Kōchi Literary Museum
Makino Botanical Garden
Ryōma's Birthplace Memorial Museum
Sakamoto Ryōma Memorial Museum
Tosa Yamauchi Family Treasury and Archives
Yanase Takashi Memorial Hall
Yokokurayama Natural Forest Museum
Yoshii Isamu Memorial Museum
Zuizan Memorial Museum

Kyushu
Fukuoka
Fukuoka Art Museum
Fukuoka City Museum
Fukuoka Oriental Ceramics Museum
Fukuoka Prefectural Museum of Art
Gorōyama kofun
Idemitsu Museum of Arts
Itokoku History Museum
Kitakyushu Municipal Museum of Art
Kitakyushu Museum of Natural History & Human History
Kokura Castle
Kubote Historical Museum
Kurume City Art Museum
Kyushu Historical Museum
Kyushu National Museum
Matsumoto Seichō Memorial Museum
Tachiarai Peace Memorial Museum

Saga Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Arita Ceramic Art Museum
Arita Porcelain Park
Chōkokan
Imaemon Museum of Ceramic Antiques
Kawamura Art Museum
Kyūshū Ceramic Museum
Nakatomi Memorial Medicine Museum
Saga Castle History Museum
Saga Prefectural Art Museum
Saga Prefectural Museum
Saga Prefectural Nagoya Castle Museum
Yōkō Art Museum
Yūtoku Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Arita Folk and History Museum East Building & Arita Ware Reference Museum
Fukagawa Porcelain China On The Park Chūjikan
Genkai Town Museum of History and Folklore
Imari City Ceramic Merchants Museum
Imari History and Folklore Museum
Imari-Nabeshima Gallery
Kamimine Town Furusato Gakkan
Karatsu Castle
Karatsu City Kodai no Mori Kaikan
Kashima City Folk Museum
Kōhoku Town Museum
Matsurokan
Muraoka Sōhonpo Yōkan Museum
Nakabayashi Gochiku Memorial Museum
Ogi City Historical Museum
Ōkuma Shigenobu Memorial Museum
Saga City History and Folklore Museum
Saga Prefecture Agricultural Research Center Museum
Saga Prefecture Space and Science Museum
Saga University Art Museum
Sano Tsunetami Memorial Museum
Shida Ware Museum
Taihei-an Sake Brewery Museum
Takeo City Library and History Museum
Taku City Museum
Tara Town Museum of History and Folklore
Ureshino City Museum of History and Folklore
Yoshinogari site Yayoi Life Museum

Nagasaki Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Confucius Shrine & Historical Museum of China
Huis Ten Bosch Museums
Iki City Ikikoku Museum
Ikitsuki Island Museum, Shima no Yakata
Matsura Historical Museum
Nagasaki Junshin Catholic University Museum
Nagasaki Museum of History and Culture
Nagasaki Prefectural Art Museum
Sasebo City Museum, Shimase Art Center
Shin-Kamigotō Geihinkan Museum
Unzen Vidro Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Endō Shūsaku Literary Museum
Glover Garden
Gunkanjima Museum
Former Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Nagasaki Branch Memorial Multi-Purpose Hall
Gotō Kankō History Museum
Hirado Castle
Hirado Dutch Trading Post
Hirado Kirishitan Museum
Inori-no-Oka Picture Book Museum
Kamitsushima Town Museum of History and Folklore
Matsunaga Yasuzaemon Memorial Museum
Matsuura City Buried Cultural Property Center
MDSF Sasebo History Museum
Mine Town Museum of History and Folklore
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Nagasaki Shipyard & Machinery Works Historical Museum
Mount Unzen Disaster Memorial Hall
Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Museum
Nagasaki City Bekkō Crafts Museum
Nagasaki City Father de Rotz Memorial Museum
Nagasaki City Iōjima Lighthouse Memorial Museum
Nagasaki City Kameyama Shachū Memorial Museum
Nagasaki City Maizō Shiryōkan
Nagasaki City Museum of History and Folklore
Nagasaki City Noguchi Yatarō Memorial Museum of Art
Nagasaki City Old Photograph Museum
Nagasaki City Science Museum
Nagasaki City Sotome Museum of History and Folklore
Nagasaki City Takashima Coal Museum
Nagasaki National Peace Memorial Hall for the Atomic Bomb Victims
Nagasaki Peace Museum
Nagasaki Prefectural Tsushima Museum of History and Folklore
Santo Domingo Church Museum
Satotabaru Museum of History and Folklore
Shimabara Castle
Shimizu Kon Exhibition Hall (Nakano Chaya)
Siebold Memorial Museum
Suka Gogodō Art Museum
Toyotama Museum
Tsushima Museum
Twenty-Six Martyrs Museum and Monument

Former facilities
Nagasaki Subtropical Botanical Garden

Kumamoto Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Honmyō-ji Hōmotsukan
Hoshino Tomihiro Museum of Art, Ashikita
Kikuchi Shrine Historical Museum
Kumamoto City Museum
Kumamoto International Folk Craft Museum
Kumamoto Prefectural Ancient Burial Mound Museum
Kumamoto Prefectural Museum of Art
Kumamoto University Memorial Museum of the Fifth High School
Matsui Bunko Museum Kisai
Shimada Museum of Arts
Shinpūren Museum
Tamana City Historical Museum Kokoropia
Yamaga City Museum
Yatsushiro City Museum Future Forest Museum
Yunomae Manga Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc
Amakusa Archives
Amakusa Christian Museum
Amakusa City Itsuwa Museum of History and Folklore
Amakusa Collegio Museum
Amakusa Rosary Museum
Arao City Miyazaki Brothers Museum
Arao Cultural Center & Children's Science Museum
Aso Volcano Museum
Contemporary Art Museum, Kumamoto
Goshoura Cretaceous Museum
Gotō Zezan Memorial Museum
Higo no Satoyama Gallery
Hondo Museum of History and Folklore
Inukai Memorial Museum of Art
Itsuki Village History and Culture Exchange Center, Historia Terrace Itsukidani
The Janes' Residence, Kumamoto
Kitasato Shibasaburō Memorial Museum
Kiyoura Memorial Museum
Koizumi Yakumo Former Residence in Kumamoto
Kōshi City Kōshi Historical Museum
Kōshi City Nishi-Gōshi Historical Museum
Kumamoto City Tabaruzaka Seinan Civil War Museum
Kumamoto City Tsukahara Historical Museum,
Kumamoto City Water Science Museum
Kumamoto City Zoological and Botanic Gardens
Kumamoto Museum of History and Literature
Kumamoto Prefectural Traditional Arts Center
Kyūsendō Forest Museum
Matsumae Shigeyoshi Memorial Museum
Mifune Dinosaur Museum
Minamata Disease Museum
Minamiaso Luna Observatory
Nagomi Town Museum of History and Folklore
Natsume Sōseki Former Residence in Uchitsuboimachi
Newspaper Museum
Ōzu Town Museum of History and Cultural Tradition
Reihoku History Museum
Riddell-Wright Memorial Hall
Sakamoto Zenzō Museum of Art
Seiwa Bunraku Museum
Shiken Fujin Memorial Museum
Sohō Memorial Museum
Tsunagi Art Museum
Tokutomi Memorial Garden
Uki City Shiranuhi Museum (cf. shiranui)
Yamae Village History and Folklore Museum
Yamaga Lantern Folk Craft Museum
Yokoi Shōnan Memorial Museum

Ōita Prefecture
Registered museums
As of 1 April 2020, and in line with the Museum Act, there were five registered museums in Ōita Prefecture:

Kunisaki City Historical Learning Centre
Nakatsu History Museum
Nikaidō Museum of Art
Ōita City Art Museum
Ōita Prefectural Museum of History

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 1 April 2020, and in line with the Museum Act, there were ten designated museum-equivalent facilities in Ōita Prefecture:

Beppu University Museum
Hirose Museum
Hita City Museum
Kurushima Takehiko Memorial Hall
Kyūshū Natural Animal Park African Safari
Ōita Fragrance Museum
Ōita Marine Palace Aquarium "Umitamago"
Ōita Prefectural Art Museum
Ōita Prefecture Ancient Sages Historical Archives
Yabakei Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc.
In addition to the above, the following facilities are member museums of the Ōita Prefectural Museum Council (大分県博物館協議会):

Asakura Fumio Memorial Museum
Beppu City Art Museum
Bungo-Ōno City Museum of History and Folklore
Hiroike Chikurō Memorial Museum
Kitsuki Castle Town Museum
Miura Baien Museum, Kunisaki
Nakatsu Castle
Nakatsu City Museum of History and Folklore
Ōita City Historical Museum
Ōita Takasaki-yama Natural Wildlife Park
Taketa City Historical Museum
Usa Jingū Hōmotsukan
Other facilities include:

Ama Kofun Shiryōkan
Beppu Art Museum
Comico Art Museum Yufuin
Nogami Yaeko Memorial Museum of Literature
Nada-gū Hōmotsukan
Ōita Kenritsu Geijutsu Kaikan
Saiki History Museum
Sano Botanical Garden
Tenryō Hita Museum
Yufuin Modern Art Museum
Yufuin Retro Motor Museum

Miyazaki Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Miyakonojō City Museum of Art
Miyazaki Prefectural Art Museum
Miyazaki Prefectural Museum of Nature and History
Saitobaru Archaeological Museum of Miyazaki Prefecture
Shiiba Folk Arts Museum
Takanabe Museum of Art

Museum-like facilities, etc
Agricultural Museum, University of Miyazaki Faculty of Agriculture
Aoshima Subtropical Botanical Garden
Aya International Craft Castle
Ebino History and Folklore Museum
Former Yoshimatsu Family Residence
Gokase Town Museum of the Blessings of Nature
Hyūga City History and Folk Museum
Hyūga City Hososhima Port Museum
Ishii Jūji Shiryōkan
Kadogawa History and Folk Museum
Kunitomi Sōgō Bunka Kaikan
Miyakonojō History Museum
Miyakonojō Shimazu Residence
Miyazaki Art Center
Miyazaki City Museum of History & Ikime-no-Mori Yūkokan
Miyazaki Jingū Chōkokan
Miyazaki Prefectural Buried Cultural Property Center
Miyazaki Science Center
Morotsuka Folk Museum
Naitō Memorial Museum
Nishimera Museum of History and Folklore
Nobeoka Botanical Garden
Nojiri Museum of History and Folklore
Obi Castle History Museum
Ōyodo River Study Center
Saito City Museum of History and Folklore
Takachiho Community Center
Takanabe Town Museum of History
Wakayama Bokusui Memorial Museum of Literature
Yasui Sokken Memorial Museum

Former museums
Miyazaki Museum of History and Culture

Kagoshima Prefecture
Registered museums and designated museum-equivalent facilities
Harano Agricultural Museum
Ibusuki Archaeological Museum, Jiyūkan Cocco Hashimure
The International University of Kagoshima Faculty of Intercultural Studies Museum of Archaeology
Iwasaki Art Museum
Jigen-ryū Swordsmanship Museum
Kagoshima City Modern Literature Museum & Kagoshima City Märchen Fairy Tale Museum
Kagoshima City Museum of Art
Kagoshima Prefectural Museum
Kagoshima University Museum
Kodama Museum of Art
Matsushita Museum of Art
Miyake Museum of Art
Nagashima Museum
Nakamura Shinya Art Museum
Reimeikan, Kagoshima Prefectural Center for Historical Material
Shōko Shūseikan
Yoshii Junji Art Museum
Yōzan Museum of Art

Museum-like facilities, etc
As of 20 June 2019, other than the above, the following were members of the Kagoshima Prefecture Museum Association (鹿児島県博物館協会):

Aira City History and Folk Museum
Akune City History Museum
Amami City Amami Museum (also a member museum of Okinawa Prefecture Museum Society)
Amami City Museum of History and Folklore (member museum of Okinawa Prefecture Museum Society)
Amami Park (Amami no Sato, Tanaka Isson Memorial Museum of Art)
Chin Jukan Museum
Flower Park Kagoshima
Hioki City Fukiage Museum of History and Folklore
Hirota Site Museum & Park
History Museum Kimpō, Minamisatsuma City
Isen Town Museum of History and Folklore
Ishibashi Park & Memorial Hall
Izumi City Crane Museum, Crane Park Izumi
Izumi City History and Folk Museum
Izumi Fumoto History Museum
Japan Mandarin Orange Center
Kagoshima Aquarium
Kagoshima City Hirakawa Zoological Park
Kagoshima City Museum of Archaeology
Kagoshima Immaculate Heart University Museum
Kagoshima Municipal Science Hall
Kagoshima Women's Junior College Museum
Kasasa Art Museum, Minamisatsuma (Kurose Lookout Museum)
Kasasa Ebisu
Kihoku Historical Folk Museum, Kanoya City
Kimotsuki Museum of History and Folklore
Kirishima City Hayato Museum of History and Folklore
Kirishima Open Air Museum
Kirishima Kokubu Museum of History
Kishinkan, Bōnotsu Center for Historical Material
Makurazaki Nanmeikan Cultural Resource Center
Minamisatsuma Municipal Museum on Kaseda Local History
Minamitane Town Museum
Miyanojō Historical Center, Satsuma
Muku Hatojū Memorial Museum of Literature
Museum Chiran
Museum of the Meiji Restoration
Nagashima Town Museum of History and Folklore
Nakatane Town Museum of History and Folklore
Saigō Nanshū Memorial Museum
Sakurajima Visitor Center
Satsuma Denshōkan
Satsuma Students Museum
Satsumasendai History Museum
Satsumasendai Magokoro Museum of Literature
Setouchi Town Library & Setouchi Municipal Museum (also a member museum of Okinawa Prefecture Museum Society)
Shibushi City Buried Cultural Property Center
Sueyoshi Museum of History and Folklore, Soo City
Tanegashima Akagome Museum
Tanegashima Development Center
Tokunoshima Town Museum
Uenohara Jōmon no Mori
Wadomari Town Museum of History and Folklore (also a member museum of Okinawa Prefecture Museum Society)
Yakushima Environmental and Cultural Village Center
Yakushima Town History and Folk Museum
Yakusugi Museum
In addition to the above, the following facilities are in Kagoshima Prefecture:

Bansei Tokkō Peace Museum
Chiran Peace Museum for Kamikaze Pilots
Ei Museum of History and Folklore, Minamikyūshū
Kanoya Air Base Museum
Kihoku Astronomical Museum
Kirishima City Museum of History and Folklore
Little Miyata Museum
Nansatsu Railway Museum
Nihonga Memorial Museum of Art, Sōbun
Sakurajima International Volcanic Sabō Center
Sendai Space Hall
Yokogawa Museum of History and Traditional Crafts, Kirishima

Okinawa Prefecture
Registered museums
As of 1 May 2018, and in line with the Museum Act, there were eleven registered museums in Okinawa Prefecture:

Ginowan City Museum
Himeyuri Peace Museum
Ishigaki City Yaeyama Museum
Kumejima Museum
Miyakojima City Museum
Nago Museum
Naha Municipal Tsuboya Pottery Museum
Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium
Okinawa Municipal Museum
Okinawa Prefectural Museum & Art Museum
Urasoe Art Museum

Designated museum-equivalent facilities
As of 1 May 2018, and in line with the Museum Act, there were six designated museum-equivalent facilities in Okinawa Prefecture:

Haebaru Culture Center
Okinawa Kodomo Future Zone
Okinawa World
Southeast Botanical Gardens
Ryūkyū University Museum (Fūju-kan)
Tsushima-maru Memorial Museum

Museum-like facilities, etc.
In addition to the above, and as of 1 May 2018, the Okinawa Prefectural Government lists the following facilities:

Anti-War Peace Museum (Nuchi du Takara no Ie)
Ayamihabiru Museum
Butterfly Museum Kabira
Former Navy Headquarters
Ginoza Village Museum
Higashi Village Mountain and Water Life Museum
Iheya Village History and Folk Museum
Iriomote Wildlife Conservation Center
Ishigaki Island Limestone Cave
Ishigaki Yaima Mura
Izena Fureai Folk Museum
Kihō-in Shūshūkan
Kohama Folk Museum
Kumejima Firefly Museum
Kumejima Sea Turtle Museum
Kumejima-tsumugi no Sato, Yuimāru-kan
Kadena Folk Material Hall
Kuroshima Research Station
Manko Waterbird & Wetland Center
Mekaru Family Residence
Minamidaitō Furusato Culture Center
Minamidaitō Visitor Center Shima Marugoto Museum
Minsa Weaving Craft Hall
Miyakojima City Tropical Plant Garden
Miyakojima Kaihōkan
Old Miyaradunchi
Moromi Folkcraft Museum
Motobu Town Museum
Mukashi-kan
Naha City Museum of History
Naha City Traditional Arts and Craft Center
Nakamura Family Residence
Nakijin Village History and Culture Center
Neo Park Okinawa
Nantō Folk Museum
Oceanic Culture Museum
Ōhama Nobumoto Memorial Museum
Okinawa City Street Corner Data Hall
Okinawa Nature School Museum
Okinawa Peace Hall
Okinawa Postal Material Center
Okinawa Prefectural Buried Cultural Property Center
Okinawa Prefectural Peace Memorial Museum
Omoro Botanical Garden
Onna Village Museum
Ryūkyū Black Pearl Center
Ryūkyū Shimpō Newspaper Museum
Ryukyu Village
Sakima Art Museum
Satake Yaeyama Palm Memorial Museum
Shimamuraya Sightseeing Park Folk Museum
Shuri Castle Park
Shuri Ryūsen Traditional Craft Museum
Tarama Village Furusato Minzoku Gakushūkan
Tokashiki Village History and Folk Heritage Museum
Tomigusuku City History and Folk Material Exhibition Room
Tropical & Subtropical Arboretum
Tropical Dream Center
Ueno German Culture Village Kinder House
Uezu Family Residence
Uruma City Ishikawa History and Folk Museum
Uruma City Sea Culture Museum
Uruma City Yonashiro History and Folk Museum
Yaese Town Gushikami Museum of History and Folklore
Yaeyama Peace Memorial Museum
Yambaru Wildlife Conservation Center, Ufugi Nature Museum
Yomitan Village Art Museum
Yomitan Village History and Folklore Museum
Yonabaru Town Tsunahiki Museum
Yui Rail Exhibition Hall
In addition to the above, the following appear on the list of member museums of the Okinawa Prefecture Museum Society (沖縄県博物館協会):

Eisa Museum
Minamikaze Museum
Nakagusuku Village Gosamaru Historical Materials Library
National Theatre Okinawa
Okinawa Army Hospital Haebaru Bunker No.20

References
See also

Japanese museums
Prefectural museum
Tourism in Japan
Culture of Japan
List of museums

## Tokyo Şehri - Detaylı Mekan Rehberi

### Meşhur Kafeler:
- ☕ **Starbucks** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Starbucks+Tokyo)
- ☕ **Kohikan** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Kohikan+Tokyo)
- ☕ **Starbucks** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Starbucks+Tokyo)
- ☕ **Pappelburg** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Pappelburg+Tokyo)
- ☕ **Doutor Coffee Shop** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Doutor+Coffee+Shop+Tokyo)
- ☕ **Lumba Mia** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Lumba+Mia+Tokyo)
- ☕ **EXELCIOR** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=EXELCIOR+Tokyo)

### Müzeler:
- 🏛️ **Artizon Museum** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Artizon+Museum+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Tokyo Photographic Art Museum** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Tokyo+Photographic+Art+Museum+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Japan Traditional Crafts Centre** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Japan+Traditional+Crafts+Centre+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Japan Football Museum** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Japan+Football+Museum+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Middle Eastern Culture Center in Japan** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Middle+Eastern+Culture+Center+in+Japan+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **The Ueno Royal Museum** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=The+Ueno+Royal+Museum+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Gotoh Museum Annex** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Gotoh+Museum+Annex+Tokyo)
- 🏛️ **Setagaya Museum of Art Annex Kiyokawa Taiji Memorial Gallery** - [Haritada Gör](https://www.google.com/maps/search/?api=1&query=Setagaya+Museum+of+Art+Annex+Kiyokawa+Taiji+Memorial+Gallery+Tokyo)
