--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Senegal
FILE_NAME: country_senegal.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:50:11
----------------

# Senegal

## General Overview
Senegal, officially the Republic of Senegal, is the westernmost country of mainland West Africa, situated along the Atlantic Ocean coast. It borders Mauritania to the north, Mali to the east, Guinea to the southeast and Guinea-Bissau to the southwest. Senegal nearly surrounds the Gambia, a country occupying a narrow strip of land along the banks of the Gambia River, which separates Senegal's southern region of Casamance from the rest of the country. It also shares a maritime border with Cape Verde. The capital and largest city of Senegal is Dakar.
Senegal is the westernmost country in the mainland of the Old World, or Afro-Eurasia. It owes its name to the Senegal River, which borders it to the north and east. The climate is typically Sahelian, with a rainy season. Senegal covers a land area of almost 197,000 square kilometres (76,000 sq mi) and has a population of around 18 million. The state is a semi-presidential republic; since the country's foundation in 1960, it has been recognized as one of the most stable countries on the African continent. On the 2024 V-Dem Democracy Indices, Senegal is ranked 68th in electoral democracy worldwide and 10th in electoral democracy in Africa.
The state was formed as part of the independence of French West Africa from French colonial rule. Because of this history, French is the official language, but it is understood by only a small minority of the population. Over 30 languages are spoken in Senegal. Wolof is the most widely spoken, with 80% of the population speaking it as a first or second language, acting as Senegal's lingua franca alongside French. Arabic and Pulaar also remain popular among certain communities. Like other African nations, the country includes a wide mix of ethnic and linguistic communities, with the largest being the Wolof, Fula, and Serer people. Senegalese people are predominantly Muslim.
As a developing nation, Senegal is classified as a heavily indebted poor country, with a relatively low ranking on the Human Development Index (169th out of 193). Most of the population lives on the coast and works in agriculture or other food industries; other major industries include mining, tourism, and services. The historic lack of natural resources in Senegal has redirected efforts towards increasing literacy and educational attainment. Senegal is a member state of the African Union, the United Nations, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the Community of Sahel–Saharan States.

Etymology
The country of Senegal is named after the Senegal River. The name of the river may derive from a Portuguese transliteration of the name of the Zenaga, also known as the Sanhaja. Alternatively, it could be a combination of the supreme deity in Serer religion (Rog Sene) and o gal, meaning ‘body of water’ in the Serer language. French author and priest David Boilat proposed that the name comes from the Wolof phrase "sunuu gaal", which means "our canoe".

History
Early and pre-colonial eras
Archaeological findings throughout the area indicate that Senegal was inhabited in prehistoric times and has been continuously occupied by various ethnic groups. Some kingdoms were created between the 6th and 14th centuries, such as Takrur in the 6th century, Namandiru, and the Jolof Empire in the 13th and 14th centuries. Eastern Senegal was once part of the Ghana Empire.
Islam was introduced by the Toucouleur and Soninke through their contact with the Almoravid dynasty of the Maghreb, who helped spread it with their Toucouleur allies. This movement faced resistance from ethnicities of traditional religions, the Serers in particular.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, the area came under the influence of empires to the east; the Jolof Empire was also founded during this time. In the Senegambia region, between 1300 and 1900, close to one-third of the population was enslaved, typically as a result of being taken captive in warfare.
In the 14th century, the Jolof Empire grew more powerful, having united Cayor and the kingdoms of Baol, Siné, Saloum, Waalo, Futa Tooro and Bambouk, covering much of what is now Senegal and part of present-day West Africa. The empire was a voluntary confederacy of various states rather than a state built on military conquest. The empire was founded by Ndiadiane Ndiaye, a part Serer and part Toucouleur, who was able to form a coalition with many ethnicities, but collapsed around 1549 following the defeat and death of Lele Fouli Fak at the hands of Amari Ngone Sobel Fall.

Colonial era
In the mid-15th century, the Portuguese landed on the Senegalese coast, followed by traders representing other countries, including the French. Various European powers—Portugal, the Netherlands, and Great Britain—competed for trade in the area from the 15th century onward.
In 1677, France gained control of what had become a minor hub in the Atlantic slave trade: the island of Gorée, near modern Dakar, used as a base to purchase enslaved people from the warring chiefdoms on the mainland.
European missionaries introduced Christianity to Senegal and the Casamance in the 19th century. It was only in the 1850s that the French began to expand onto the Senegalese mainland, after they abolished slavery and began promoting an abolitionist doctrine, adding native kingdoms like the Waalo, Cayor, Baol, and Jolof. French colonists under Governor Louis Faidherbe progressively invaded and took over all the kingdoms, except the Serer Kingdoms of Sine and Saloum.

Yoro Dyao was in command of the canton of Foss-Galodjina and was set over Wâlo (Ouâlo) by Louis Faidherbe, where he served as a chief from 1861 to 1914. Senegalese resistance to the French expansion was led in part by Lat-Dior, Damel of Cayor, and Maad a Sinig Kumba Ndoffene Famak Joof (the Maad a Sinig, King of Sine), resulting in the famous Battle of Logandème―the battle in which the Serer King of Sine went to war against the French colonial empire, where the French decided to take revenge against Sine following their humiliating defeat at the Battle of Djilor. The Battle of Logandème was the first battle on Senegambian soil in which the French employed cannonballs.
The Battle of Dakar (23–25 September 1940) was an unsuccessful Allied attempt to capture the strategic port and overthrow the pro-German Vichy French colonial administration.
On 25 November 1958, Senegal became an autonomous republic within the French Union.

Independence
In January 1959, Senegal and the French Sudan merged to form the Mali Federation, which became fully independent on 20 June 1960, as a result of a transfer of power agreement signed with France on 4 April 1960. Due to internal political difficulties, the Federation broke up on 20 August 1960 when Senegal and French Sudan (renamed the Republic of Mali) each proclaimed independence.
Léopold Sédar Senghor was elected Senegal's first president in August 1960. Pro-African, Senghor advocated a brand of African socialism.

1980 to present
In 1980, Senghor decided to retire from politics. In 1981, he transferred power to his hand-picked successor, Abdou Diouf. Former prime minister Mamadou Dia, who was Senghor's rival, ran for election in 1983 against Diouf, but lost.
In the 1980s, Boubacar Lam discovered Senegalese oral history that was initially compiled by the Tuculor noble, Yoro Dyâo, not long after World War I, which documented migrations into West Africa from the Nile Valley; ethnic groups, from the Senegal River to the Niger Delta, retained traditions of having an eastern origin.
Senegal joined with The Gambia to form the nominal Senegambia Confederation on 1 February 1982. However, the union was dissolved in 1989. Despite peace talks, a southern separatist group (Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance or MFDC) in the Casamance region has clashed sporadically with government forces since 1982 in the Casamance conflict. In the early 21st century, violence has subsided, and President Macky Sall held talks with rebels in Rome in December 2012.
Abdou Diouf was president between 1981 and 2000. He encouraged broader political participation, reduced government involvement in the economy, and widened Senegal's diplomatic engagements, particularly with other developing nations. Domestic politics on occasion spilled over into street violence, border tensions, and a violent separatist movement in the southern region of the Casamance. Nevertheless, Senegal's commitment to democracy and human rights strengthened. Abdou Diouf served four terms as president.
In the 1999 presidential election, opposition leader Abdoulaye Wade defeated Diouf, an election deemed free and fair by international observers. Senegal experienced its second peaceful transition of power, and its first from one political party to another. On 30 December 2004, President Wade announced that he would sign a peace treaty with the separatist group in the Casamance region. The Casamance conflict, however, has not yet been fully concluded as of 2025 despite several cease fires and treaties between the government and individual factions within the MFDC.
In March 2012, the incumbent president, Abdoulaye Wade, lost the presidential election, and Macky Sall was elected as the new President of Senegal. President Macky Sall was re-elected in 2019 elections. The presidential term was subsequently reduced from seven years to five years.

Since 3 March 2021, Senegal has been rocked by a series of mass protests in response to the arrest of Ousmane Sonko for alleged rape and mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2023, the response to the protests turned increasingly violent, with Amnesty International counting 23 fatalities, most of which were caused by bullets fired by police or armed police collaborators.
In March 2024, opposition candidate Bassirou Diomaye Faye won Senegal's presidential election over the ruling coalition's candidate, becoming the youngest president in Senegal's history. In November 2024, Faye announced that France would withdraw its troops from Senegal and close its bases by the end of 2025.
On 1 July 2025, France handed over the Rufisque joint station to Senegal. Active since 1960, this facility was responsible for communications on the southern Atlantic coast and served as a listening post in efforts to combat maritime trafficking. The handover was conducted with minimal ceremony, involving only the signing of a report. On 17 July 2025, the two military sites were returned to the Senegalese government: the airport base and Camp Geille, a 5-hectare site located in Ouakam. Four villas located in Plateau, near the port, were also transferred to the Senegalese authorities.

Government and politics
Senegal is a republic with a presidency; the president is elected every five years as of 2016, previously being seven years from independence to 2001, five years from 2001 to 2008, and seven years again from 2008 to 2016, by adult voters. The first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor, was a poet and writer, and was the first African elected to the Académie française. Senegal's second president, Abdou Diouf, later served as the organisation's general secretary. The third president was Abdoulaye Wade, a lawyer. The fourth president was Macky Sall, elected in March 2012 and reelected in February 2019. On 25 March 2024, Bassirou Diomaye Faye became the fifth democratically elected president.
Senegal has more than 80 political parties. The unicameral parliament consists of the National Assembly, which has 150 seats (a Senate was in place from 1999 to 2001 and from 2007 to 2012). Senegal also has an independent judiciary. The nation's highest courts that deal with business issues are the Constitutional Council and the Court of Justice, both of which have members appointed by the president.

Political culture
Senegal has a quasi-democratic political culture, one of the more successful post-colonial democratic transitions in Africa. Local administrators are appointed and held accountable by the president. Marabouts, religious leaders of the various Muslim brotherhoods of Senegal, have also exerted strong political influence in the country, especially during Wade's presidency. In 2009, Freedom House downgraded Senegal's status from "Free" to "Partially Free" due to increased centralisation of power in the executive. By 2014, it had recovered its Free status.
In 2008, Senegal finished in 12th position on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, which reflects the success with which governments deliver essential political goods to their citizens. When the Northern African countries were added to the index in 2009, Senegal's 2008 position was retroactively downgraded to 15th place (with Tunisia, Egypt, and Morocco placing ahead of Senegal). As of 2012, Senegal's Ibrahim Index ranking had declined to 16th among 52 African countries.
On 22 February 2011, Senegal severed diplomatic ties with Iran, saying it supplied rebels with weapons which killed Senegalese troops in the Casamance conflict.
The 2012 presidential election was controversial due to President Wade's candidacy, as the opposition argued that he was not eligible to run again. Several youth opposition movements, including M23 and Y'en a Marre, emerged in June 2011. In the end, Macky Sall of the Alliance for the Republic won, and Wade conceded the election to Sall. This peaceful and democratic transition was hailed by many foreign observers, including the EU, as a show of "maturity".
On 19 September 2012, lawmakers voted to abolish the Senate to save an estimated $15 million.
In August 2017, the ruling party won a landslide victory in the parliamentary election. President Macky Sall's ruling coalition took 125 seats in the 165-seat National Assembly. In 2019 president Macky Sall easily won re-election in the first round. On 2 April 2024, his successor Bassirou Diomaye Faye was sworn in.

Leadership in World governance initiatives
Senegal has been one of the signatories to the agreement to convene a convention to draft a world constitution. As a result, in 1968, for the first time, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth. Léopold Sédar Senghor, then president of Senegal signed the agreement to convene a World Constituent Assembly.

Administrative divisions
Senegal is subdivided into 14 regions, each administered by a Conseil Régional (Regional Council) elected by population weight at the Arrondissement level. The country is further subdivided into 45 Départements, 113 Arrondissements (neither of which has an administrative function), and Collectivités Locales, which elect administrative officers.
Regional capitals have the same name as their respective regions:

Foreign relations
Senegal has a high profile in many international organizations and was a member of the UN Security Council in 1988–1989 and 2015–2016. It was elected to the UN Commission on Human Rights in 1997. Friendly toward the West, especially the United States, Senegal has vigorously advocated for greater assistance from developed countries. Senegal is well integrated with the central bodies of the international community, including the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU), and the Community of Sahel–Saharan States.
Historically, Senegal has been close to France, its former colonizer, but this has caused significant tension with the people and was one of the reasons former President Macky Sall lost support. Senegalese often complained that Sall consistently awarded French companies priority contracts to extract Senegal's natural resources rather than giving them to whoever offered Senegal the best deal. They also believed France was pushing Macky Sall to run for an unconstitutional third term. After debating whether to run a third time for months, Sall did not.
Senegal enjoys cordial relations primarily with its neighbors. Despite evident progress on other issues with Mauritania (border security, resource management, economic integration, etc.), an estimated 35,000 Mauritanian refugees (of the 40,000 who were expelled from their home country in 1989) remain in Senegal. Morocco–Senegal relations  have also been courteous and Bassirou Diomaye Faye invited the king of Morocco on his inauguration ceremony in 2024.
Senegal is the 84th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

Military
The Armed Forces of Senegal consist of about 17,000 personnel in the army, air force, navy, and gendarmerie. The Senegalese military receives most of its training, equipment, and support from France and the United States, and to a lesser extent, Germany.
Military non-interference in political affairs has contributed to Senegal's stability since independence. Senegal has participated in many international and regional peacekeeping missions. Most recently, in 2000, Senegal sent a battalion to the Democratic Republic of Congo to participate in MONUC, the United Nations peacekeeping mission, and agreed to deploy a US-trained battalion to Sierra Leone for UNAMSIL, another UN peacekeeping mission.
In 2015, Senegal participated in the Saudi Arabian-led military intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis.

Law
Senegal is a secular state, as defined in its Constitution.
To fight corruption, the government has established the National Anti-Corruption Office (OFNAC) and the Commission for the Restitution and Recovery of Illegally Acquired Assets. According to the Business Anti-Corruption Portal, President Sall created the OFNAC to replace the Commission Nationale de Lutte Contre la non-Transparence, la Corruption et la Concussion (CNLCC). It is said that the OFNAC represents a more effective tool for fighting corruption than the CNLCC established under former President Wade. The mission of OFNAC is to fight corruption, embezzlement of public funds, and fraud. OFNAC has the power of self-referral (own initiative investigation). OFNAC is composed of twelve members appointed by decree.
Homosexuality is illegal in Senegal. According to a 2013 survey by the Pew Research Center, 96% of Senegalese believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. LGBTQ community members in Senegal report a strong feeling of being unsafe.

Geography
Senegal is located on the western coast of Africa. It lies between latitudes 12° and 17°N, and longitudes 11° and 18°W.
Senegal is externally bounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Mauritania to the north, Mali to the east, and Guinea and Guinea-Bissau to the south; internally it almost completely surrounds The Gambia, namely on the north, east and south, except for Gambia's short Atlantic coastline.
The Senegalese landscape consists mainly of the rolling sandy plains of the western Sahel, which rise to foothills in the southeast. Here is also found Senegal's highest point, Baunez ridge situated 2.7 km southeast of Nepen Diakha at 648 m (2,126 ft). The northern border is formed by the Senegal River; other rivers include the Gambia and Casamance Rivers. The capital Dakar lies on the Cap-Vert peninsula, the westernmost point of continental Africa.
The Cape Verde islands lie some 560 kilometres (350 mi) off the Senegalese coast, but Cap-Vert ("Cape Green") is a maritime placemark, set at the foot of "Les Mammelles", a 105-metre (344 ft) cliff resting at one end of the Cap-Vert peninsula onto which is settled Senegal's capital Dakar, and 1 kilometre (0.6 mi) south of the "Pointe des Almadies", the westernmost point in Africa.
Senegal contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, Sahelian Acacia savanna, West Sudanian savanna, and Guinean mangroves.

Climate
Senegal has a tropical climate with pleasant year-round heat and well-defined dry and humid seasons driven by northeast winter and southwest summer winds. The dry season (December to April) is characterized by hot, dry harmattan winds.
Dakar's annual rainfall of about 600 mm (24 in) occurs between June and October when maximum temperatures average 30 °C (86.0 °F) and minimums 24.2 °C (75.6 °F); December to February maximum temperatures average 25.7 °C (78.3 °F) and minimums 18 °C (64.4 °F).
Interior temperatures are higher than along the coast (for example, average daily temperatures in Kaolack and Tambacounda for May are 30 °C (86.0 °F) and 32.7 °C (90.9 °F) respectively, compared to Dakar's 23.2 °C (73.8 °F) ), and rainfall increases substantially farther south, exceeding 1,500 mm (59.1 in) annually in some areas.
In Tambacounda, located in the far interior near the Mali border where the desert begins, temperatures can reach 54 °C (129.2 °F). The northernmost part of the country is the Lompoul desert, which has a near-hot desert climate, the central part has a hot semi-arid climate. The southernmost part has a tropical wet and dry climate. Senegal is mainly a sunny and dry country.

Wildlife
Economy
Industry and trade
Three trans-African automobile routes pass through Senegal:

Cairo-Dakar Highway (1)
Dakar-Ndjamena Highway (5)
Dakar-Lagos Highway (7)
The main industries include food processing, mining, cement, artificial fertilizer, chemicals, textiles, refining imported petroleum, and tourism. Exports include fish, chemicals, cotton, fabrics, groundnuts, and calcium phosphate. The largest export markets as of 2020 are Mali (20.4%), Switzerland (12.2%), and India (8.3%).
As a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Senegal is working toward greater regional integration with a unified external tariff. Senegal is also a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa.
Senegal achieved full Internet connectivity in 1996, creating a mini-boom in information technology-based services. Private activity now accounts for 82 percent of its GDP. On the negative side, Senegal faces deep-seated urban problems of chronic high unemployment.
Senegal is a major recipient of international development assistance. Donors include the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Japan, France, and China. Over 4,000 Peace Corps Volunteers have served in Senegal since 1963.

Agriculture
Fishing
Senegal has a 12-nautical-mile (22 km; 14 mi) exclusive fishing zone. Fishing is a sizable sector of the Senegalese economy, as 3.2 percent of Senegal's GDP and around 600,000 jobs come from the fishing industry. Overfishing and illegal fishing from international vessels are serious issues in Senegal, and have severely impacted the number of fish on Senegalese shores. 57% of fish stocks in Senegal are in a "state of collapse", and some boats—especially trawlers—owned by other countries fly the Senegalese flag in order to evade the rules and fish in the country's waters, harming artisanal fishermen in the process. 
In May 2024, Senegal publicly released the list of all boats with valid licenses allowed to fish in their waters as an effort to reduce IUU fishing.

Energy
Demographics
Senegal has a population of about 18 million, of whom about 42 percent live in rural areas. Density in these areas varies from about 77 inhabitants per square kilometre (200/sq mi) in the west-central region to 2 per square kilometre (5.2/sq mi) in the arid eastern section.

Gender
Senegal ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, as well as the additional protocol. Senegal is also a signatory to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, adopted at the 2003 African Union Summit. However, feminists have been critical of the government's lack of action in enforcing the protocols, conventions, and other texts that have been signed as a means of protecting women's rights, and have stated that everyday practices and customs typically maintain a patriarchal character. Similarly, Afrobarometer found that Senegalese women often remain in a disadvantaged position.

Ethnic groups
Senegal has a wide variety of ethnic groups and, as in most West African countries, several languages are widely spoken. According to "CIA World Factbook:  Senegal" (2019 estimates), the ethnic groups are Wolof (39%); Fula (probably including the Halpulaar speaking Toucouleur) (27.5%); Serer group (probably including the Serer Cangin peoples) (16%); Mandinka (4.9%); Jola (4.2%); Soninke (2.4%); other 5.4% (includes Europeans and persons of Lebanese descent), and other minor ethnic groups like the Bassari, Maures or (Naarkajors).

There are also tens of thousands of Mauritanian refugees in Senegal, primarily in the country's north.
According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Senegal has a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 23,800 in 2007. The majority of this population (20,200) is from Mauritania. Refugees live in N'dioum, Dodel, and small settlements along the Senegal River valley.

Languages
French is the official language, spoken by all those who have spent several years in the educational system, where French is used as the medium of instruction (Koranic schools are also popular, but Arabic is less widely spoken outside the context of recitation). Overall, French speakers were estimated to make up 26% of the population in 2022. During the 15th century, many European territories started to engage in trade in Senegal. In the 19th century, France increased its colonial influence in Senegal, and the number of French-speaking people grew steadily. French was ratified as the official language of Senegal in 1960 when the country achieved independence.
Most people also speak their own ethnic language, while, especially in Dakar, Wolof is the lingua franca. Pulaar is spoken by the Fulas and Toucouleur. The Serer language is widely spoken by both Serers and non-Serers (including President Sall, whose wife is Serer); so are the Cangin languages, whose speakers are ethnically Serers. Jola languages are widely spoken in the Casamance. Overall, Senegal is home to around 39 distinct languages. Several have the legal status of "national languages": Balanta-Ganja, Arabic, Jola-Fonyi, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon (Serer-Noon), Pulaar, Serer, Soninke, and Wolof.

English is taught as a foreign language in secondary schools and many graduate school programs. It is the only subject matter that has a special office in the Ministry of Education. Dakar is home to a few bilingual schools which offer half of their curriculum in English. The Senegalese American Bilingual School (SABS), Yavuz Selim, and The West African College of the Atlantic (WACA) train thousands of fluent English speakers in four-year programs. English is widely used by the scientific community and in business, including by the Modou-Modou (illiterate, self-taught businessmen).
Portuguese Creole, locally known as Portuguese, is a prominent minority language in Ziguinchor, the regional capital of the Casamance, spoken by local Portuguese creoles and immigrants from Guinea-Bissau. The local Cape Verdean community speaks a similar Portuguese creole, Cape Verdean Creole, as well as standard Portuguese. Portuguese was introduced in Senegal's secondary education in 1961 in Dakar by the country's first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor. It is currently available in most of Senegal and in higher education. It is especially prevalent in Casamance, particularly in relation to local cultural identity.

A variety of immigrant languages are spoken, such as Bambara (70,000), Mooré (37,000), Kabuverdiano (34,000), Krio (6,100), Vietnamese (2,500), and Portuguese (1,700), mostly in Dakar.
While French is the sole official language, a rising Senegalese linguistic nationalist movement supports the integration of Wolof, the country's common vernacular, into the national constitution.
Senegalese regions of Dakar, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaffrine, Kaolack, Kedougou, Kolda, Louga, Matam, Saint-Louis, Sedhiou, Tambacounda, Thies, and Ziguinchor are members of the International Association of Francophone regions.

Largest cities
Dakar, the capital, is by far the largest city in Senegal, with over two million residents. The second most populous city is Touba, a de jure communaute rurale (rural community), with over half a million people.

Religion
Senegal is a secular state. According to "CIA World Factbook: Senegal" Islam is the predominant religion in the country, practiced by 97.2% of the country's population; the Christian community, at 2.7% of the population, consists mostly of  Roman Catholics but there are also diverse Evangelical denominations. Less than 1% hold animist beliefs, particularly in the southeastern region of the country. Some Serer people follow the Serer religion. According to the Berkley Center,  "approximately 95 percent of the population is Muslim and the other five percent is primarily Christian or animist." Marloes Janson, of SOAS, University of London, and other scholars, posit that, in Senegal, Gambia, and many African countries where Islam is dominant, Muslim communities tend to syncretise Islam with Traditional African religions, leading to a distinctive "African Islam".
According to a 2012 Pew demographic study, 55% of the Muslims in Senegal are Sunni of the Maliki madhhab with Sufi influences, whilst 27% are non-denominational Muslims. Islamic communities in Senegal are generally organized around one of several Islamic Sufi orders called tariqas, headed by a khalif (xaliifa in Wolof, from Arabic khalīfa), who is usually a direct descendant of the group's founder; the study found that 92% of Senegalese Muslims belonged to a Sufi order. The two most significant and prominent Sufi tariqas in Senegal are the Tijaniyya, whose largest Senegalese sub-groups are based in the cities of Tivaouane and Kaolack, and have a broad following in West Africa outside of Senegal, and the Murīdiyya (Murid), who are based in the city of Touba and has a follower base mostly limited to within Senegal.

The Halpulaar (Pulaar-speakers), composed of Fula people, a widespread group found along the Sahel from Chad to Senegal, and Toucouleurs, represent 23.8 percent of the population. Historically, they were the first to become Muslim. Many of the Toucouleurs, or sedentary Halpulaar of the Senegal River Valley in the north, converted to Islam around a millennium ago and later contributed to Islam's propagation throughout Senegal.
Most communities south of the Senegal River Valley, however, were not thoroughly Islamized. The Serer people stood out as one of this group, who spent over one thousand years resisting Islamization (see Serer history). Although many Serers are Christians or Muslim, their conversion to Islam in particular is very recent and came of free will rather than by force, after forced conversion had been unsuccessfully tried centuries earlier (see Battle of Fandane-Thiouthioune).

As a country with more than 90% Muslims, holidays such as Tabaski, Koriteh, Gamou, and Weri Kor are highly regarded.
The spread of formal Quranic schools (called daara in Wolof) during the colonial period was driven mainly by the Tidjâniyya. In Murid communities, which place greater emphasis on the work ethic than on literary Quranic studies, the term daara often refers to work groups devoted to serving a religious leader. Today, most Senegalese children study at daaras for several years, memorizing as much of the Qur'an as they can. Some of them continue their religious studies at councils (majlis) or at the growing number of private Arabic schools and publicly funded Franco-Arabic schools.
Small Catholic communities are mainly found in coastal Serer, Jola, Mankanya, and Balant populations, and in eastern Senegal among the Bassari and Coniagui. Immigrants mainly attend Protestant churches, but during the second half of the 20th century, these churches, led by Senegalese leaders from different ethnic groups, have evolved. In Dakar, Catholic and Protestant rites are practiced by the Lebanese, Cape Verdean, European, and American immigrant populations, by certain Africans from other countries, and by the Senegalese themselves.

Serer religion encompasses a belief in a supreme deity called Roog (Koox among the Cangin), Serer cosmogony, cosmology and divination ceremonies such as the annual Xooy (or Khoy) ceremony presided over by the Serer Saltigues (high priests and priestesses). They were ancient Serer festivals rooted in Serer religion, not Islam.
The Boukout is one of the Jola's religious ceremonies.
A small number of members of the Bani Israel tribe in the Senegalese bush claim Jewish ancestry. However, this is disputed. The Mahayana branch of Buddhism in Senegal is followed by a very tiny portion of the expat Vietnamese community. The Bahá'í Faith in Senegal was established after 'Abdu'l-Bahá, the son of the founder of the religion, mentioned Africa as a place that Bahá'ís should more broadly visit. The first Bahá'is to set foot in the territory of French West Africa that would become Senegal arrived in 1953. The first Bahá'í Local Spiritual Assembly of Senegal was elected in 1966 in Dakar. In 1975 the Bahá'í community elected the first National Spiritual Assembly of Senegal. The most recent estimate, by the Association of Religion Data Archives in a 2005 report, details the population of Senegalese Bahá'ís at 22,000.

Health
Life expectancy at birth was estimated to be 66.8 years in 2016 (64.7 years male, 68.7 years female). Public expenditure on health was at 2.4 percent of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure was at 3.5 percent. Health expenditure was at US$72 (PPP) per capita in 2004. The fertility rate ranged 5 to 5.3 between 2005 and 2013, with 4.1 in urban areas and 6.3 in rural areas, as official survey (6.4 in 1986 and 5.7 in 1997) point out. There were six physicians per 100,000 persons in the early 2000s (decade). Infant mortality in Senegal was 157 per 1,000 live births in 1950., but since then it has declined five-fold to 32 per 1,000 in 2018. In the past five years infant mortality rates of malaria have dropped. According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 26% of women in Senegal have undergone female genital mutilation.
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began in Senegal, prompting the imposition of a curfew. Malaria is endemic throughout Senegal, and the entire population is at risk.
In June 2021, Senegal's Agency for Universal Health launched sunucmu.com (SunuCMU), a website that the agency hopes will streamline health care in the country. The website is a part of the Minister of State Mohammad Abdallah Dionne's plan for digitalization. He aims to make Senegal's health care system effective and sustainable. Using SunuCMU, Senegal hopes to achieve 75 percent coverage within two years of the launch.

Education
Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution, adopted in January 2001, guarantee access to education for all children. Education is compulsory and free up to the age of 16. The Ministry of Labor has indicated that the public school system is unable to cope with the number of children that must enroll each year. Portuguese is taught at schools at the secondary high school level, given the large Cape Verdean community, and also from Guinea-Bissau. There are sizeable Portuguese Creole and standard Portuguese-speaking communities in Ziguinchor and Dakar.
Illiteracy is high, particularly among women. The net primary enrollment rate was 69 percent in 2005. In the fiscal year 2025, 3.5 percent of the budget was allocated for the Ministry of Education. Public expenditure on education was 5.4 percent of the 2002–2005 GDP. Senegal was ranked 89th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Culture
Senegal is well known for the West African tradition of storytelling, performed by griots, who have kept West African history alive for thousands of years through words and music. The griot profession is passed down generation to generation and requires years of training and apprenticeship in genealogy, history, and music. Griots give voice to generations of West African society.
The African Renaissance Monument, built in 2010 in Dakar, is the tallest statue in Africa. Dakar also hosts a film festival, Recidak.
The Islamic festival of Eid al-Adha, known locally as Tabaski, is popularly celebrated by Senegalese people. Despite being predominantly Muslim, the Christian celebration of Christmas is also widely observed, with Christmas trees and decorations lining the streets of Dakar.

Cuisine
Because Senegal borders the Atlantic Ocean, fish is very important. Chicken, lamb, peas, eggs, and beef are also used in Senegalese cooking, but not pork, due to the nation's essentially Muslim population. Peanuts, the primary crop of Senegal, as well as couscous, white rice, sweet potatoes, lentils, black-eyed peas, and various vegetables, are also incorporated into many recipes. Meats and vegetables are typically stewed or marinated in herbs and spices, then served over rice or couscous or with bread.
Popular fresh juices are made from bissap, ginger, buoy  (pronounced 'buoy', which is the fruit of the baobab tree, also known as "monkey bread fruit"), mango, or other fruit or wild trees (most famously soursop, which is called corossol in French). Desserts are vibrant and sweet, combining native ingredients with the extravagance and style characteristic of French influence on Senegal's culinary traditions. They are often served with fresh fruit and are traditionally followed by coffee or tea.

Music
Senegal is known across Africa for its musical roots, due to the popularity of mbalax, which originated from the Serer percussive tradition, especially the Njuup, it has been popularized by Youssou N'Dour, Omar Pene, and others. Sabar drumming is especially popular. The sabar is mostly used in special celebrations such as weddings. Another instrument, the tama, is used in more ethnic groups. Other popular international renowned Senegalese musicians are Ismael Lô, Cheikh Lô, Orchestra Baobab, Baaba Maal, Akon (US-born), Thione Seck, Viviane, Fallou Dieng, Titi, Seckou Keita, Wasis Diop, and Pape Diouf.

Cinema
Media
Hospitality
Hospitality, in theory, is highly valued in Senegalese culture and is widely considered part of national identity. The Wolof word for hospitality is "teranga" and it is so identified with the pride of Senegal that the national football team is known as Les Lions de la Téranga.

Sport
Senegalese play many sports. Wrestling and football are the most popular sports in the country. Senegal will host the 2026 Summer Youth Olympics in Dakar, making Senegal the first African country to host an Olympic event.
Senegalese wrestling is the country's most popular sport and has become a national obsession. It traditionally serves many young men to escape poverty. It is the only sport recognized as developed independently of Western culture.

Football is a popular sport in Senegal. In 2022, the national team beat Egypt to win the Africa Cup of Nations for the first time. They were runners-up in 2002 and 2019. They won the 2025 Africa Cup of Nations beating Morocco 1-0 in extra time. They became one of only four African teams to ever reach the quarter-finals of the FIFA World Cup, after Cameroon in 1990 and before Ghana in 2010, defeating holders France in their first game in 2002. Senegal qualified for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia, for the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar, and for the 2026 FIFA World Cup in Canada/Mexico/USA.
Senegal has traditionally been one of Africa's dominant basketball powers. The men's team performed better than any other African nation at the 2014 FIBA World Cup, reaching the playoffs for the first time. The women's team won 19 medals at 20 African Championships, more than twice as many medals as any competitor. When the country hosted the 2019 FIBA Women's AfroBasket, 15,000 fans flocked to the Dakar Arena which is registered as a record attendance for basketball in Africa. Senegal was one of the continent's pioneers in basketball as it established one of Africa's first competitive leagues.
In 2016, the NBA announced the launch of an Elite Academy in Africa, specifically in Senegal.
The country hosted the Paris–Dakar rally from 1979 until 2007. The Dakar Rally was an off-road endurance motorsport race that ran from Paris, France, to Dakar, Senegal. The competitors used off-road vehicles to cross the difficult geography. The last race was held in 2007, before the 2008 rally was canceled a day before the event due to security concerns in Mauritania. The 2021 Ocean X-Prix of the electric off-road championship Extreme E was also hosted in Senegal. 
The 2026 Summer Youth Olympics are planned to be held in Dakar, Senegal.

See also
Outline of Senegal

Explanatory notes
References
African Renaissance Monument

Further reading
External links
Key Development Forecasts for Senegal from International Futures

Government
Presidency – official website of the president of Senegal
Prime Minister – official website of the prime minister of Senegal
Supreme Court – official website of the Supreme Court of Senegal
Statistics and Demography – official website of the National Agency for Statistics and Demography

History
"History" – Senegalese History at the Ministry of Tourism and Handicraft

Tourism
Destination Senegal – Senegal's official tourism portal

Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Senegal
 Geographic data related to Senegal at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Senegal
Tourism in Senegal is a vital part of the West African nation's economy.

Scale
From a relatively small industry at the introduction of the first Club Med resort in the 1970s, tourism has grown to be an important part of the Senegalese economy. Since the 1990s, Senegal has made an effort to reach beyond visitors from the former colonial power France and is attracting tourists from Spain, Britain and Italy, in part motivated by the example of neighboring Gambia, which draws a relatively larger tourist share from Northern Europe and the Americas to its Banjul coastal resorts.
In 2008, Senegal's foreign tourist visitors had reached 1 million, attracted to luxury beach resorts, natural and historic sites. The return rate for visitors stood at around 30% in 2008.
Future projections and bookings announced in 2009 raised fears that the 2008 financial crisis and Great Recession would reduce 2009 and 2010 tourist visits, with a booking rate down from 30% the year before to 5%.

Attractions
Principal cities of interest include the capital, Dakar; Saint-Louis, an old colonial town; and the Mouride holy centre of Touba. Gorée Island, formerly a centre of the West African slave trade and a UNESCO World Heritage Site, draws many visitors.
Most tourists from outside Africa are Europeans, especially French, and a hotel and resort industry centered on enclosed beach resorts, mostly at resort towns like Saly on the Petite Côte south of Dakar, has arisen to appeal to this clientele since the 1970s. U.S. tourists - often African-Americans - are increasing in numbers, drawn in particular by the historic slave trading post of Goree Island.
Resort vacations are often supplemented by wildlife and nature tours of areas like the Sine-Saloum Delta, the Grande Côte (north of Dakar), the Lac Rose, and Senegal River delta in the north (near Saint-Louis). There are also safari trips offered to see wildlife, perhaps limited by east or South African standards.

National parks and reserves
Senegal has a small but developing National Park and Reserve System. Notable among these are the Langue de Barbarie National Park and Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary, which provide wildlife habitat in the dunes and mangrove swamps surrounding the mouth of the Senegal River near city of Saint-Louis.
The Niokolo-Koba National Park is a World Heritage Site and natural protected area in south eastern Senegal, near the Guinea-Bissau border, which protects a large variety of wild animals, including hippopotamuses, elephants, and lions. Largely undeveloped, the area is remote and lacks tourist infrastructure, but is a destination for specialty tours.
The Basse Casamance National Park, in the far southwest, includes both ecotourism and tropical forest excursions, and a popular coastal beach resort aimed at foreign tourism. Birdwatching is a major draw. The Casamance conflict has hindered tourist development in this area. The Park has been closed now for a number of years due to rebel activity and mines. On attempting to enter the park (Jan 2019) via Emaye I was turned back by heavily armed army personnel, in no uncertain terms.
The Saloum Delta National Park is a large area of mangrove estuaries and islands, visited by tourists for its wildlife, its cultural interest as the home of the minority Serer people, and its proximity to the tourist resorts of the Petite-Côte. Smaller parks and reserves, like the Guembeul Natural Reserve in the center west, or the Bandia Natural Reserve near Dakar, exit primarily for the more conventional European tourist industry, resembling wildlife parks or zoos.

Infrastructure
The main entrance point is Dakar-Blaise Diagne International Airport. Senegal's capital city of Dakar, on the westernmost point of the continent, is strategically located.
European flights into Dakar are populated by a mix of Senegalese living abroad, African travelers making connections, western European tourists, and a recent surge in Asian workers traveling to work on Chinese government-funded construction projects.
United States–based Delta Air Lines opened in December 2006 an Atlanta-Dakar-Johannesburg-Dakar-Atlanta route. The Open Skies Agreement between the U.S. and Senegal signed in January 2001 laid the foundation for direct routes between the U.S. and Senegal by U.S. carriers.
British based travel companies, long organising trips to neighbouring anglophone Gambia, have begun entering a package travel market to Senegal which was until recently dominated by French and Belgian companies.

Governance and promotion
Regulation, promotion and development of the nation's tourist sector is the remit of Senegal's Ministry of Senegalese Overseas and Tourism (Ministère des Sénégalais de l'Extérieur et du Tourisme (SENEX) or sometimes Ministère des Sénégalais de L'extérieur, de L'artisanat et du Tourisme).
A number of agencies, boards, and partnerships which administer promote and regulate the Senegalese tourism sector report to this ministry.  These include the Directorate for the Study and Planning of Tourism (Direction des Etudes et de la Planification touristique), the Directorate of Tourism Regulation and Structure (Direction de la Réglementation et de l’Encadrement du Tourisme), and the National Tourist Promotion Board (Agence nationale de la Promotion touristique – ANPT).
In addition, offices of the Ministry specialise in Tourist industry infrastructural and promotion funding (the Secrétariat du Comité de Gestion du Fonds de Promotion Touristique) and oversea a Tourist industry training school (the Secrétariat du Comité de Gestion du Fonds de Promotion Touristique - ENFHT).

References
External links
Niokobok: e-Tourisme, Fair trade, Volunteers and NGOs at Senegal

## Culture of Senegal
Senegal, officially the Republic of Senegal, is the westernmost country of mainland West Africa, situated along the Atlantic Ocean coast. It borders Mauritania to the north, Mali to the east, Guinea to the southeast and Guinea-Bissau to the southwest. Senegal nearly surrounds the Gambia, a country occupying a narrow strip of land along the banks of the Gambia River, which separates Senegal's southern region of Casamance from the rest of the country. It also shares a maritime border with Cape Verde. The capital and largest city of Senegal is Dakar.
Senegal is the westernmost country in the mainland of the Old World, or Afro-Eurasia. It owes its name to the Senegal River, which borders it to the north and east. The climate is typically Sahelian, with a rainy season. Senegal covers a land area of almost 197,000 square kilometres (76,000 sq mi) and has a population of around 18 million. The state is a semi-presidential republic; since the country's foundation in 1960, it has been recognized as one of the most stable countries on the African continent. On the 2024 V-Dem Democracy Indices, Senegal is ranked 68th in electoral democracy worldwide and 10th in electoral democracy in Africa.
The state was formed as part of the independence of French West Africa from French colonial rule. Because of this history, French is the official language, but it is understood by only a small minority of the population. Over 30 languages are spoken in Senegal. Wolof is the most widely spoken, with 80% of the population speaking it as a first or second language, acting as Senegal's lingua franca alongside French. Arabic and Pulaar also remain popular among certain communities. Like other African nations, the country includes a wide mix of ethnic and linguistic communities, with the largest being the Wolof, Fula, and Serer people. Senegalese people are predominantly Muslim.
As a developing nation, Senegal is classified as a heavily indebted poor country, with a relatively low ranking on the Human Development Index (169th out of 193). Most of the population lives on the coast and works in agriculture or other food industries; other major industries include mining, tourism, and services. The historic lack of natural resources in Senegal has redirected efforts towards increasing literacy and educational attainment. Senegal is a member state of the African Union, the United Nations, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the Community of Sahel–Saharan States.

Etymology
The country of Senegal is named after the Senegal River. The name of the river may derive from a Portuguese transliteration of the name of the Zenaga, also known as the Sanhaja. Alternatively, it could be a combination of the supreme deity in Serer religion (Rog Sene) and o gal, meaning ‘body of water’ in the Serer language. French author and priest David Boilat proposed that the name comes from the Wolof phrase "sunuu gaal", which means "our canoe".

History
Early and pre-colonial eras
Archaeological findings throughout the area indicate that Senegal was inhabited in prehistoric times and has been continuously occupied by various ethnic groups. Some kingdoms were created between the 6th and 14th centuries, such as Takrur in the 6th century, Namandiru, and the Jolof Empire in the 13th and 14th centuries. Eastern Senegal was once part of the Ghana Empire.
Islam was introduced by the Toucouleur and Soninke through their contact with the Almoravid dynasty of the Maghreb, who helped spread it with their Toucouleur allies. This movement faced resistance from ethnicities of traditional religions, the Serers in particular.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, the area came under the influence of empires to the east; the Jolof Empire was also founded during this time. In the Senegambia region, between 1300 and 1900, close to one-third of the population was enslaved, typically as a result of being taken captive in warfare.
In the 14th century, the Jolof Empire grew more powerful, having united Cayor and the kingdoms of Baol, Siné, Saloum, Waalo, Futa Tooro and Bambouk, covering much of what is now Senegal and part of present-day West Africa. The empire was a voluntary confederacy of various states rather than a state built on military conquest. The empire was founded by Ndiadiane Ndiaye, a part Serer and part Toucouleur, who was able to form a coalition with many ethnicities, but collapsed around 1549 following the defeat and death of Lele Fouli Fak at the hands of Amari Ngone Sobel Fall.

Colonial era
In the mid-15th century, the Portuguese landed on the Senegalese coast, followed by traders representing other countries, including the French. Various European powers—Portugal, the Netherlands, and Great Britain—competed for trade in the area from the 15th century onward.
In 1677, France gained control of what had become a minor hub in the Atlantic slave trade: the island of Gorée, near modern Dakar, used as a base to purchase enslaved people from the warring chiefdoms on the mainland.
European missionaries introduced Christianity to Senegal and the Casamance in the 19th century. It was only in the 1850s that the French began to expand onto the Senegalese mainland, after they abolished slavery and began promoting an abolitionist doctrine, adding native kingdoms like the Waalo, Cayor, Baol, and Jolof. French colonists under Governor Louis Faidherbe progressively invaded and took over all the kingdoms, except the Serer Kingdoms of Sine and Saloum.

Yoro Dyao was in command of the canton of Foss-Galodjina and was set over Wâlo (Ouâlo) by Louis Faidherbe, where he served as a chief from 1861 to 1914. Senegalese resistance to the French expansion was led in part by Lat-Dior, Damel of Cayor, and Maad a Sinig Kumba Ndoffene Famak Joof (the Maad a Sinig, King of Sine), resulting in the famous Battle of Logandème―the battle in which the Serer King of Sine went to war against the French colonial empire, where the French decided to take revenge against Sine following their humiliating defeat at the Battle of Djilor. The Battle of Logandème was the first battle on Senegambian soil in which the French employed cannonballs.
The Battle of Dakar (23–25 September 1940) was an unsuccessful Allied attempt to capture the strategic port and overthrow the pro-German Vichy French colonial administration.
On 25 November 1958, Senegal became an autonomous republic within the French Union.

Independence
In January 1959, Senegal and the French Sudan merged to form the Mali Federation, which became fully independent on 20 June 1960, as a result of a transfer of power agreement signed with France on 4 April 1960. Due to internal political difficulties, the Federation broke up on 20 August 1960 when Senegal and French Sudan (renamed the Republic of Mali) each proclaimed independence.
Léopold Sédar Senghor was elected Senegal's first president in August 1960. Pro-African, Senghor advocated a brand of African socialism.

1980 to present
In 1980, Senghor decided to retire from politics. In 1981, he transferred power to his hand-picked successor, Abdou Diouf. Former prime minister Mamadou Dia, who was Senghor's rival, ran for election in 1983 against Diouf, but lost.
In the 1980s, Boubacar Lam discovered Senegalese oral history that was initially compiled by the Tuculor noble, Yoro Dyâo, not long after World War I, which documented migrations into West Africa from the Nile Valley; ethnic groups, from the Senegal River to the Niger Delta, retained traditions of having an eastern origin.
Senegal joined with The Gambia to form the nominal Senegambia Confederation on 1 February 1982. However, the union was dissolved in 1989. Despite peace talks, a southern separatist group (Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance or MFDC) in the Casamance region has clashed sporadically with government forces since 1982 in the Casamance conflict. In the early 21st century, violence has subsided, and President Macky Sall held talks with rebels in Rome in December 2012.
Abdou Diouf was president between 1981 and 2000. He encouraged broader political participation, reduced government involvement in the economy, and widened Senegal's diplomatic engagements, particularly with other developing nations. Domestic politics on occasion spilled over into street violence, border tensions, and a violent separatist movement in the southern region of the Casamance. Nevertheless, Senegal's commitment to democracy and human rights strengthened. Abdou Diouf served four terms as president.
In the 1999 presidential election, opposition leader Abdoulaye Wade defeated Diouf, an election deemed free and fair by international observers. Senegal experienced its second peaceful transition of power, and its first from one political party to another. On 30 December 2004, President Wade announced that he would sign a peace treaty with the separatist group in the Casamance region. The Casamance conflict, however, has not yet been fully concluded as of 2025 despite several cease fires and treaties between the government and individual factions within the MFDC.
In March 2012, the incumbent president, Abdoulaye Wade, lost the presidential election, and Macky Sall was elected as the new President of Senegal. President Macky Sall was re-elected in 2019 elections. The presidential term was subsequently reduced from seven years to five years.

Since 3 March 2021, Senegal has been rocked by a series of mass protests in response to the arrest of Ousmane Sonko for alleged rape and mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2023, the response to the protests turned increasingly violent, with Amnesty International counting 23 fatalities, most of which were caused by bullets fired by police or armed police collaborators.
In March 2024, opposition candidate Bassirou Diomaye Faye won Senegal's presidential election over the ruling coalition's candidate, becoming the youngest president in Senegal's history. In November 2024, Faye announced that France would withdraw its troops from Senegal and close its bases by the end of 2025.
On 1 July 2025, France handed over the Rufisque joint station to Senegal. Active since 1960, this facility was responsible for communications on the southern Atlantic coast and served as a listening post in efforts to combat maritime trafficking. The handover was conducted with minimal ceremony, involving only the signing of a report. On 17 July 2025, the two military sites were returned to the Senegalese government: the airport base and Camp Geille, a 5-hectare site located in Ouakam. Four villas located in Plateau, near the port, were also transferred to the Senegalese authorities.

Government and politics
Senegal is a republic with a presidency; the president is elected every five years as of 2016, previously being seven years from independence to 2001, five years from 2001 to 2008, and seven years again from 2008 to 2016, by adult voters. The first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor, was a poet and writer, and was the first African elected to the Académie française. Senegal's second president, Abdou Diouf, later served as the organisation's general secretary. The third president was Abdoulaye Wade, a lawyer. The fourth president was Macky Sall, elected in March 2012 and reelected in February 2019. On 25 March 2024, Bassirou Diomaye Faye became the fifth democratically elected president.
Senegal has more than 80 political parties. The unicameral parliament consists of the National Assembly, which has 150 seats (a Senate was in place from 1999 to 2001 and from 2007 to 2012). Senegal also has an independent judiciary. The nation's highest courts that deal with business issues are the Constitutional Council and the Court of Justice, both of which have members appointed by the president.

Political culture
Senegal has a quasi-democratic political culture, one of the more successful post-colonial democratic transitions in Africa. Local administrators are appointed and held accountable by the president. Marabouts, religious leaders of the various Muslim brotherhoods of Senegal, have also exerted strong political influence in the country, especially during Wade's presidency. In 2009, Freedom House downgraded Senegal's status from "Free" to "Partially Free" due to increased centralisation of power in the executive. By 2014, it had recovered its Free status.
In 2008, Senegal finished in 12th position on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, which reflects the success with which governments deliver essential political goods to their citizens. When the Northern African countries were added to the index in 2009, Senegal's 2008 position was retroactively downgraded to 15th place (with Tunisia, Egypt, and Morocco placing ahead of Senegal). As of 2012, Senegal's Ibrahim Index ranking had declined to 16th among 52 African countries.
On 22 February 2011, Senegal severed diplomatic ties with Iran, saying it supplied rebels with weapons which killed Senegalese troops in the Casamance conflict.
The 2012 presidential election was controversial due to President Wade's candidacy, as the opposition argued that he was not eligible to run again. Several youth opposition movements, including M23 and Y'en a Marre, emerged in June 2011. In the end, Macky Sall of the Alliance for the Republic won, and Wade conceded the election to Sall. This peaceful and democratic transition was hailed by many foreign observers, including the EU, as a show of "maturity".
On 19 September 2012, lawmakers voted to abolish the Senate to save an estimated $15 million.
In August 2017, the ruling party won a landslide victory in the parliamentary election. President Macky Sall's ruling coalition took 125 seats in the 165-seat National Assembly. In 2019 president Macky Sall easily won re-election in the first round. On 2 April 2024, his successor Bassirou Diomaye Faye was sworn in.

Leadership in World governance initiatives
Senegal has been one of the signatories to the agreement to convene a convention to draft a world constitution. As a result, in 1968, for the first time, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth. Léopold Sédar Senghor, then president of Senegal signed the agreement to convene a World Constituent Assembly.

Administrative divisions
Senegal is subdivided into 14 regions, each administered by a Conseil Régional (Regional Council) elected by population weight at the Arrondissement level. The country is further subdivided into 45 Départements, 113 Arrondissements (neither of which has an administrative function), and Collectivités Locales, which elect administrative officers.
Regional capitals have the same name as their respective regions:

Foreign relations
Senegal has a high profile in many international organizations and was a member of the UN Security Council in 1988–1989 and 2015–2016. It was elected to the UN Commission on Human Rights in 1997. Friendly toward the West, especially the United States, Senegal has vigorously advocated for greater assistance from developed countries. Senegal is well integrated with the central bodies of the international community, including the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU), and the Community of Sahel–Saharan States.
Historically, Senegal has been close to France, its former colonizer, but this has caused significant tension with the people and was one of the reasons former President Macky Sall lost support. Senegalese often complained that Sall consistently awarded French companies priority contracts to extract Senegal's natural resources rather than giving them to whoever offered Senegal the best deal. They also believed France was pushing Macky Sall to run for an unconstitutional third term. After debating whether to run a third time for months, Sall did not.
Senegal enjoys cordial relations primarily with its neighbors. Despite evident progress on other issues with Mauritania (border security, resource management, economic integration, etc.), an estimated 35,000 Mauritanian refugees (of the 40,000 who were expelled from their home country in 1989) remain in Senegal. Morocco–Senegal relations  have also been courteous and Bassirou Diomaye Faye invited the king of Morocco on his inauguration ceremony in 2024.
Senegal is the 84th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

Military
The Armed Forces of Senegal consist of about 17,000 personnel in the army, air force, navy, and gendarmerie. The Senegalese military receives most of its training, equipment, and support from France and the United States, and to a lesser extent, Germany.
Military non-interference in political affairs has contributed to Senegal's stability since independence. Senegal has participated in many international and regional peacekeeping missions. Most recently, in 2000, Senegal sent a battalion to the Democratic Republic of Congo to participate in MONUC, the United Nations peacekeeping mission, and agreed to deploy a US-trained battalion to Sierra Leone for UNAMSIL, another UN peacekeeping mission.
In 2015, Senegal participated in the Saudi Arabian-led military intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis.

Law
Senegal is a secular state, as defined in its Constitution.
To fight corruption, the government has established the National Anti-Corruption Office (OFNAC) and the Commission for the Restitution and Recovery of Illegally Acquired Assets. According to the Business Anti-Corruption Portal, President Sall created the OFNAC to replace the Commission Nationale de Lutte Contre la non-Transparence, la Corruption et la Concussion (CNLCC). It is said that the OFNAC represents a more effective tool for fighting corruption than the CNLCC established under former President Wade. The mission of OFNAC is to fight corruption, embezzlement of public funds, and fraud. OFNAC has the power of self-referral (own initiative investigation). OFNAC is composed of twelve members appointed by decree.
Homosexuality is illegal in Senegal. According to a 2013 survey by the Pew Research Center, 96% of Senegalese believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. LGBTQ community members in Senegal report a strong feeling of being unsafe.

Geography
Senegal is located on the western coast of Africa. It lies between latitudes 12° and 17°N, and longitudes 11° and 18°W.
Senegal is externally bounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Mauritania to the north, Mali to the east, and Guinea and Guinea-Bissau to the south; internally it almost completely surrounds The Gambia, namely on the north, east and south, except for Gambia's short Atlantic coastline.
The Senegalese landscape consists mainly of the rolling sandy plains of the western Sahel, which rise to foothills in the southeast. Here is also found Senegal's highest point, Baunez ridge situated 2.7 km southeast of Nepen Diakha at 648 m (2,126 ft). The northern border is formed by the Senegal River; other rivers include the Gambia and Casamance Rivers. The capital Dakar lies on the Cap-Vert peninsula, the westernmost point of continental Africa.
The Cape Verde islands lie some 560 kilometres (350 mi) off the Senegalese coast, but Cap-Vert ("Cape Green") is a maritime placemark, set at the foot of "Les Mammelles", a 105-metre (344 ft) cliff resting at one end of the Cap-Vert peninsula onto which is settled Senegal's capital Dakar, and 1 kilometre (0.6 mi) south of the "Pointe des Almadies", the westernmost point in Africa.
Senegal contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, Sahelian Acacia savanna, West Sudanian savanna, and Guinean mangroves.

Climate
Senegal has a tropical climate with pleasant year-round heat and well-defined dry and humid seasons driven by northeast winter and southwest summer winds. The dry season (December to April) is characterized by hot, dry harmattan winds.
Dakar's annual rainfall of about 600 mm (24 in) occurs between June and October when maximum temperatures average 30 °C (86.0 °F) and minimums 24.2 °C (75.6 °F); December to February maximum temperatures average 25.7 °C (78.3 °F) and minimums 18 °C (64.4 °F).
Interior temperatures are higher than along the coast (for example, average daily temperatures in Kaolack and Tambacounda for May are 30 °C (86.0 °F) and 32.7 °C (90.9 °F) respectively, compared to Dakar's 23.2 °C (73.8 °F) ), and rainfall increases substantially farther south, exceeding 1,500 mm (59.1 in) annually in some areas.
In Tambacounda, located in the far interior near the Mali border where the desert begins, temperatures can reach 54 °C (129.2 °F). The northernmost part of the country is the Lompoul desert, which has a near-hot desert climate, the central part has a hot semi-arid climate. The southernmost part has a tropical wet and dry climate. Senegal is mainly a sunny and dry country.

Wildlife
Economy
Industry and trade
Three trans-African automobile routes pass through Senegal:

Cairo-Dakar Highway (1)
Dakar-Ndjamena Highway (5)
Dakar-Lagos Highway (7)
The main industries include food processing, mining, cement, artificial fertilizer, chemicals, textiles, refining imported petroleum, and tourism. Exports include fish, chemicals, cotton, fabrics, groundnuts, and calcium phosphate. The largest export markets as of 2020 are Mali (20.4%), Switzerland (12.2%), and India (8.3%).
As a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Senegal is working toward greater regional integration with a unified external tariff. Senegal is also a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa.
Senegal achieved full Internet connectivity in 1996, creating a mini-boom in information technology-based services. Private activity now accounts for 82 percent of its GDP. On the negative side, Senegal faces deep-seated urban problems of chronic high unemployment.
Senegal is a major recipient of international development assistance. Donors include the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Japan, France, and China. Over 4,000 Peace Corps Volunteers have served in Senegal since 1963.

Agriculture
Fishing
Senegal has a 12-nautical-mile (22 km; 14 mi) exclusive fishing zone. Fishing is a sizable sector of the Senegalese economy, as 3.2 percent of Senegal's GDP and around 600,000 jobs come from the fishing industry. Overfishing and illegal fishing from international vessels are serious issues in Senegal, and have severely impacted the number of fish on Senegalese shores. 57% of fish stocks in Senegal are in a "state of collapse", and some boats—especially trawlers—owned by other countries fly the Senegalese flag in order to evade the rules and fish in the country's waters, harming artisanal fishermen in the process. 
In May 2024, Senegal publicly released the list of all boats with valid licenses allowed to fish in their waters as an effort to reduce IUU fishing.

Energy
Demographics
Senegal has a population of about 18 million, of whom about 42 percent live in rural areas. Density in these areas varies from about 77 inhabitants per square kilometre (200/sq mi) in the west-central region to 2 per square kilometre (5.2/sq mi) in the arid eastern section.

Gender
Senegal ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, as well as the additional protocol. Senegal is also a signatory to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, adopted at the 2003 African Union Summit. However, feminists have been critical of the government's lack of action in enforcing the protocols, conventions, and other texts that have been signed as a means of protecting women's rights, and have stated that everyday practices and customs typically maintain a patriarchal character. Similarly, Afrobarometer found that Senegalese women often remain in a disadvantaged position.

Ethnic groups
Senegal has a wide variety of ethnic groups and, as in most West African countries, several languages are widely spoken. According to "CIA World Factbook:  Senegal" (2019 estimates), the ethnic groups are Wolof (39%); Fula (probably including the Halpulaar speaking Toucouleur) (27.5%); Serer group (probably including the Serer Cangin peoples) (16%); Mandinka (4.9%); Jola (4.2%); Soninke (2.4%); other 5.4% (includes Europeans and persons of Lebanese descent), and other minor ethnic groups like the Bassari, Maures or (Naarkajors).

There are also tens of thousands of Mauritanian refugees in Senegal, primarily in the country's north.
According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Senegal has a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 23,800 in 2007. The majority of this population (20,200) is from Mauritania. Refugees live in N'dioum, Dodel, and small settlements along the Senegal River valley.

Languages
French is the official language, spoken by all those who have spent several years in the educational system, where French is used as the medium of instruction (Koranic schools are also popular, but Arabic is less widely spoken outside the context of recitation). Overall, French speakers were estimated to make up 26% of the population in 2022. During the 15th century, many European territories started to engage in trade in Senegal. In the 19th century, France increased its colonial influence in Senegal, and the number of French-speaking people grew steadily. French was ratified as the official language of Senegal in 1960 when the country achieved independence.
Most people also speak their own ethnic language, while, especially in Dakar, Wolof is the lingua franca. Pulaar is spoken by the Fulas and Toucouleur. The Serer language is widely spoken by both Serers and non-Serers (including President Sall, whose wife is Serer); so are the Cangin languages, whose speakers are ethnically Serers. Jola languages are widely spoken in the Casamance. Overall, Senegal is home to around 39 distinct languages. Several have the legal status of "national languages": Balanta-Ganja, Arabic, Jola-Fonyi, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon (Serer-Noon), Pulaar, Serer, Soninke, and Wolof.

English is taught as a foreign language in secondary schools and many graduate school programs. It is the only subject matter that has a special office in the Ministry of Education. Dakar is home to a few bilingual schools which offer half of their curriculum in English. The Senegalese American Bilingual School (SABS), Yavuz Selim, and The West African College of the Atlantic (WACA) train thousands of fluent English speakers in four-year programs. English is widely used by the scientific community and in business, including by the Modou-Modou (illiterate, self-taught businessmen).
Portuguese Creole, locally known as Portuguese, is a prominent minority language in Ziguinchor, the regional capital of the Casamance, spoken by local Portuguese creoles and immigrants from Guinea-Bissau. The local Cape Verdean community speaks a similar Portuguese creole, Cape Verdean Creole, as well as standard Portuguese. Portuguese was introduced in Senegal's secondary education in 1961 in Dakar by the country's first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor. It is currently available in most of Senegal and in higher education. It is especially prevalent in Casamance, particularly in relation to local cultural identity.

A variety of immigrant languages are spoken, such as Bambara (70,000), Mooré (37,000), Kabuverdiano (34,000), Krio (6,100), Vietnamese (2,500), and Portuguese (1,700), mostly in Dakar.
While French is the sole official language, a rising Senegalese linguistic nationalist movement supports the integration of Wolof, the country's common vernacular, into the national constitution.
Senegalese regions of Dakar, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaffrine, Kaolack, Kedougou, Kolda, Louga, Matam, Saint-Louis, Sedhiou, Tambacounda, Thies, and Ziguinchor are members of the International Association of Francophone regions.

Largest cities
Dakar, the capital, is by far the largest city in Senegal, with over two million residents. The second most populous city is Touba, a de jure communaute rurale (rural community), with over half a million people.

Religion
Senegal is a secular state. According to "CIA World Factbook: Senegal" Islam is the predominant religion in the country, practiced by 97.2% of the country's population; the Christian community, at 2.7% of the population, consists mostly of  Roman Catholics but there are also diverse Evangelical denominations. Less than 1% hold animist beliefs, particularly in the southeastern region of the country. Some Serer people follow the Serer religion. According to the Berkley Center,  "approximately 95 percent of the population is Muslim and the other five percent is primarily Christian or animist." Marloes Janson, of SOAS, University of London, and other scholars, posit that, in Senegal, Gambia, and many African countries where Islam is dominant, Muslim communities tend to syncretise Islam with Traditional African religions, leading to a distinctive "African Islam".
According to a 2012 Pew demographic study, 55% of the Muslims in Senegal are Sunni of the Maliki madhhab with Sufi influences, whilst 27% are non-denominational Muslims. Islamic communities in Senegal are generally organized around one of several Islamic Sufi orders called tariqas, headed by a khalif (xaliifa in Wolof, from Arabic khalīfa), who is usually a direct descendant of the group's founder; the study found that 92% of Senegalese Muslims belonged to a Sufi order. The two most significant and prominent Sufi tariqas in Senegal are the Tijaniyya, whose largest Senegalese sub-groups are based in the cities of Tivaouane and Kaolack, and have a broad following in West Africa outside of Senegal, and the Murīdiyya (Murid), who are based in the city of Touba and has a follower base mostly limited to within Senegal.

The Halpulaar (Pulaar-speakers), composed of Fula people, a widespread group found along the Sahel from Chad to Senegal, and Toucouleurs, represent 23.8 percent of the population. Historically, they were the first to become Muslim. Many of the Toucouleurs, or sedentary Halpulaar of the Senegal River Valley in the north, converted to Islam around a millennium ago and later contributed to Islam's propagation throughout Senegal.
Most communities south of the Senegal River Valley, however, were not thoroughly Islamized. The Serer people stood out as one of this group, who spent over one thousand years resisting Islamization (see Serer history). Although many Serers are Christians or Muslim, their conversion to Islam in particular is very recent and came of free will rather than by force, after forced conversion had been unsuccessfully tried centuries earlier (see Battle of Fandane-Thiouthioune).

As a country with more than 90% Muslims, holidays such as Tabaski, Koriteh, Gamou, and Weri Kor are highly regarded.
The spread of formal Quranic schools (called daara in Wolof) during the colonial period was driven mainly by the Tidjâniyya. In Murid communities, which place greater emphasis on the work ethic than on literary Quranic studies, the term daara often refers to work groups devoted to serving a religious leader. Today, most Senegalese children study at daaras for several years, memorizing as much of the Qur'an as they can. Some of them continue their religious studies at councils (majlis) or at the growing number of private Arabic schools and publicly funded Franco-Arabic schools.
Small Catholic communities are mainly found in coastal Serer, Jola, Mankanya, and Balant populations, and in eastern Senegal among the Bassari and Coniagui. Immigrants mainly attend Protestant churches, but during the second half of the 20th century, these churches, led by Senegalese leaders from different ethnic groups, have evolved. In Dakar, Catholic and Protestant rites are practiced by the Lebanese, Cape Verdean, European, and American immigrant populations, by certain Africans from other countries, and by the Senegalese themselves.

Serer religion encompasses a belief in a supreme deity called Roog (Koox among the Cangin), Serer cosmogony, cosmology and divination ceremonies such as the annual Xooy (or Khoy) ceremony presided over by the Serer Saltigues (high priests and priestesses). They were ancient Serer festivals rooted in Serer religion, not Islam.
The Boukout is one of the Jola's religious ceremonies.
A small number of members of the Bani Israel tribe in the Senegalese bush claim Jewish ancestry. However, this is disputed. The Mahayana branch of Buddhism in Senegal is followed by a very tiny portion of the expat Vietnamese community. The Bahá'í Faith in Senegal was established after 'Abdu'l-Bahá, the son of the founder of the religion, mentioned Africa as a place that Bahá'ís should more broadly visit. The first Bahá'is to set foot in the territory of French West Africa that would become Senegal arrived in 1953. The first Bahá'í Local Spiritual Assembly of Senegal was elected in 1966 in Dakar. In 1975 the Bahá'í community elected the first National Spiritual Assembly of Senegal. The most recent estimate, by the Association of Religion Data Archives in a 2005 report, details the population of Senegalese Bahá'ís at 22,000.

Health
Life expectancy at birth was estimated to be 66.8 years in 2016 (64.7 years male, 68.7 years female). Public expenditure on health was at 2.4 percent of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure was at 3.5 percent. Health expenditure was at US$72 (PPP) per capita in 2004. The fertility rate ranged 5 to 5.3 between 2005 and 2013, with 4.1 in urban areas and 6.3 in rural areas, as official survey (6.4 in 1986 and 5.7 in 1997) point out. There were six physicians per 100,000 persons in the early 2000s (decade). Infant mortality in Senegal was 157 per 1,000 live births in 1950., but since then it has declined five-fold to 32 per 1,000 in 2018. In the past five years infant mortality rates of malaria have dropped. According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 26% of women in Senegal have undergone female genital mutilation.
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began in Senegal, prompting the imposition of a curfew. Malaria is endemic throughout Senegal, and the entire population is at risk.
In June 2021, Senegal's Agency for Universal Health launched sunucmu.com (SunuCMU), a website that the agency hopes will streamline health care in the country. The website is a part of the Minister of State Mohammad Abdallah Dionne's plan for digitalization. He aims to make Senegal's health care system effective and sustainable. Using SunuCMU, Senegal hopes to achieve 75 percent coverage within two years of the launch.

Education
Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution, adopted in January 2001, guarantee access to education for all children. Education is compulsory and free up to the age of 16. The Ministry of Labor has indicated that the public school system is unable to cope with the number of children that must enroll each year. Portuguese is taught at schools at the secondary high school level, given the large Cape Verdean community, and also from Guinea-Bissau. There are sizeable Portuguese Creole and standard Portuguese-speaking communities in Ziguinchor and Dakar.
Illiteracy is high, particularly among women. The net primary enrollment rate was 69 percent in 2005. In the fiscal year 2025, 3.5 percent of the budget was allocated for the Ministry of Education. Public expenditure on education was 5.4 percent of the 2002–2005 GDP. Senegal was ranked 89th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Culture
Senegal is well known for the West African tradition of storytelling, performed by griots, who have kept West African history alive for thousands of years through words and music. The griot profession is passed down generation to generation and requires years of training and apprenticeship in genealogy, history, and music. Griots give voice to generations of West African society.
The African Renaissance Monument, built in 2010 in Dakar, is the tallest statue in Africa. Dakar also hosts a film festival, Recidak.
The Islamic festival of Eid al-Adha, known locally as Tabaski, is popularly celebrated by Senegalese people. Despite being predominantly Muslim, the Christian celebration of Christmas is also widely observed, with Christmas trees and decorations lining the streets of Dakar.

Cuisine
Because Senegal borders the Atlantic Ocean, fish is very important. Chicken, lamb, peas, eggs, and beef are also used in Senegalese cooking, but not pork, due to the nation's essentially Muslim population. Peanuts, the primary crop of Senegal, as well as couscous, white rice, sweet potatoes, lentils, black-eyed peas, and various vegetables, are also incorporated into many recipes. Meats and vegetables are typically stewed or marinated in herbs and spices, then served over rice or couscous or with bread.
Popular fresh juices are made from bissap, ginger, buoy  (pronounced 'buoy', which is the fruit of the baobab tree, also known as "monkey bread fruit"), mango, or other fruit or wild trees (most famously soursop, which is called corossol in French). Desserts are vibrant and sweet, combining native ingredients with the extravagance and style characteristic of French influence on Senegal's culinary traditions. They are often served with fresh fruit and are traditionally followed by coffee or tea.

Music
Senegal is known across Africa for its musical roots, due to the popularity of mbalax, which originated from the Serer percussive tradition, especially the Njuup, it has been popularized by Youssou N'Dour, Omar Pene, and others. Sabar drumming is especially popular. The sabar is mostly used in special celebrations such as weddings. Another instrument, the tama, is used in more ethnic groups. Other popular international renowned Senegalese musicians are Ismael Lô, Cheikh Lô, Orchestra Baobab, Baaba Maal, Akon (US-born), Thione Seck, Viviane, Fallou Dieng, Titi, Seckou Keita, Wasis Diop, and Pape Diouf.

Cinema
Media
Hospitality
Hospitality, in theory, is highly valued in Senegalese culture and is widely considered part of national identity. The Wolof word for hospitality is "teranga" and it is so identified with the pride of Senegal that the national football team is known as Les Lions de la Téranga.

Sport
Senegalese play many sports. Wrestling and football are the most popular sports in the country. Senegal will host the 2026 Summer Youth Olympics in Dakar, making Senegal the first African country to host an Olympic event.
Senegalese wrestling is the country's most popular sport and has become a national obsession. It traditionally serves many young men to escape poverty. It is the only sport recognized as developed independently of Western culture.

Football is a popular sport in Senegal. In 2022, the national team beat Egypt to win the Africa Cup of Nations for the first time. They were runners-up in 2002 and 2019. They won the 2025 Africa Cup of Nations beating Morocco 1-0 in extra time. They became one of only four African teams to ever reach the quarter-finals of the FIFA World Cup, after Cameroon in 1990 and before Ghana in 2010, defeating holders France in their first game in 2002. Senegal qualified for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia, for the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar, and for the 2026 FIFA World Cup in Canada/Mexico/USA.
Senegal has traditionally been one of Africa's dominant basketball powers. The men's team performed better than any other African nation at the 2014 FIBA World Cup, reaching the playoffs for the first time. The women's team won 19 medals at 20 African Championships, more than twice as many medals as any competitor. When the country hosted the 2019 FIBA Women's AfroBasket, 15,000 fans flocked to the Dakar Arena which is registered as a record attendance for basketball in Africa. Senegal was one of the continent's pioneers in basketball as it established one of Africa's first competitive leagues.
In 2016, the NBA announced the launch of an Elite Academy in Africa, specifically in Senegal.
The country hosted the Paris–Dakar rally from 1979 until 2007. The Dakar Rally was an off-road endurance motorsport race that ran from Paris, France, to Dakar, Senegal. The competitors used off-road vehicles to cross the difficult geography. The last race was held in 2007, before the 2008 rally was canceled a day before the event due to security concerns in Mauritania. The 2021 Ocean X-Prix of the electric off-road championship Extreme E was also hosted in Senegal. 
The 2026 Summer Youth Olympics are planned to be held in Dakar, Senegal.

See also
Outline of Senegal

Explanatory notes
References
African Renaissance Monument

Further reading
External links
Key Development Forecasts for Senegal from International Futures

Government
Presidency – official website of the president of Senegal
Prime Minister – official website of the prime minister of Senegal
Supreme Court – official website of the Supreme Court of Senegal
Statistics and Demography – official website of the National Agency for Statistics and Demography

History
"History" – Senegalese History at the Ministry of Tourism and Handicraft

Tourism
Destination Senegal – Senegal's official tourism portal

Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Senegal
 Geographic data related to Senegal at OpenStreetMap

## Cuisine of Senegal
The cuisine of Senegal is a West African cuisine that derives from the nation's many ethnic groups, the largest being the Wolof, Fula, and Serer. The food you find in Senegal is the same food you would find in the countries surrounding it or in West Africa, sometimes, but often called by different names or made slightly differently.   
Because Senegal borders the Atlantic Ocean, fish is very important in Senegalese cooking. Chicken, lamb, peas, eggs, and beef are also used, but pork is usually not due to the nation's largely Muslim population. Peanuts, Senegal's primary cash crop, as well as millet, white rice, sweet potatoes, cassava, black-eyed peas and various vegetables, are also incorporated into many recipes. Meats and vegetables are typically stewed or marinated in herbs and spices, and then poured over rice or millet couscous or eaten with bread.
Popular fresh juices are made from bissap, ginger, bouye (pronounced 'buoy', which is the fruit of the baobab tree, also known as "monkey bread fruit"), mango, or other fruit or wild trees (most famously soursop, which is called corossol in French).
Desserts are very rich and sweet, combining native ingredients with the extravagance and style characteristic of the French impact on Senegal's culinary methods. They are often served with fresh fruit and are traditionally followed by coffee or tea. Tea, known as attaya, is served in a ritualistic fashion.

Breakfast
Ndambé or ndambe—beans cooked in a spiced tomato paste, typically served on bread as a breakfast sandwich.
Bread and café touba

Lunch and dinner
Thieboudienne or chebu jën (among other names)—"The Rice of Fish." Dubbed as the national dish of Senegal, it consists of flavoursome fish that has been marinated with parsley, lemon, garlic, onions (and other herbs), then later cooked with tomato paste and a variety of vegetables such as lettuce, cabbage, and carrots. Rice is later added to the mix giving it a reddish look.
Thiébou yapp or chebu yap—"The Rice of Meat." It is very popular with the Senegalese and is usually cooked with beef (or lamb) that is first fried and garnished with onions, garlic, black pepper, red pepper, and salt (and other ingredients). Mustard and water are later added to the mix for the meat to tenderize and soak up all the flavours. As with chebu jën, rice is then added to the mix and tends to be garnished with either green olives or cooked black-eyed peas.
Thiébou guinar or chebu ginaar—"The Rice of Chicken." The preparation and procedures are similar to that of chebu yap: the chicken is first fried with herbs and spices, and later soaked in water and mustard. When the rice is to be added, it is usually garnished with carrots.
Thiébou guerté or chebu gerte—"The Rice of Peanut." Peanuts are Senegal's most important cash crop. It too follows the same preparations and procedures as chebu yap and chebu ginaar, where the meat is first fried with herbs and spices. However, peanut butter is added to the dish, replacing mustard, which is added with water to allow the meat to soak up all the flavour. Creating a thick paste, rice is then added to the mix. This dish is not very well known and is rarely cooked by the Senegalese, but if so, only on special occasions.
Yassa—Now popular in other West African countries, yassa is chicken or fish first marinated with spices, then simmered with onion, garlic, mustard, and lemon juice. This creates a chicken and onion sauce side-dish that is served with plain white rice. Yassa originated from the Jola people.
Saadj or chere —a traditional millet couscous.
Maafe—seasoned fish, chicken, lamb, or beef cooked with vegetables in a tomato and peanut butter sauce.
Tchou or chu - a tomato-based stew with vegetables, especially onions, and fish balls.
Bassi-salté— A traditional stew, consisting of seasoned meat cooked with tomato paste and vegetables over chere.
Sombi—sweet milk-rice soup.
Capitaine à la Saint-Louisienne—perch stuffed with spices.
Caldou—a sauce with fish and vegetables.
Fattaya—most often a street food, fried dough filled with French fries, a thick yassa onion sauce, a fried egg, and a bit of ketchup and hot sauce.
Dibi- Senegalese barbecue, usually fire-grilled lamb but chicken or beef can also be found.
Soupe kandia—okra soup.

Desserts
Thiakry—a couscous eaten with yogurt.
Lakh - a pudding made with Thiakry grains and a more liquid yogurt (called "lait caillé" or soured milk).
Ngalakh - a mixture of peanut butter and baobab pulp eaten with couscous
Cinq centimes—the "five-cent cookie", a peanut cookie popular in marketplaces
Sombi - a rice pudding made with coconut milk

Drinks
Bissap is the most popular beverage. It is a purplish-red juice made from hibiscus flowers, water and sugar. Fresh mint leaves and orange blossom are sometimes added.
Other juices are also drunk: dakhar (tamarind juice), gingembre (ginger brew),  bouye (brew made from baobab fruit), and ditakh.
The consumption of fresh fruit juice is not very common.
Attaya (made from Chinese gunpowder tea, sugar and mint) is also highly popular.
Local beers (Gazelle and Flag brands) are available; however, alcohol consumption within the population is not very popular given that the majority of the population is Muslim (95%).

Bibliography
Tevi L. Adambounou: Application du principe de la déshydratation partielle par Osmose A: La conservation post-récolte de légumes tropicaux et tentatives d'introduction du produit fini dans les habitudes alimentaires sénégalaises, Université de Laval (Québec), 1983.
Amadou Sarra Ba: Les goûts et les usages culinaires dans l’espace sénégambien VIII-XIX, Dakar, Université Cheikh Anta Diop, 2001.
Monique Biarnès: La Cuisine sénégalaise, Paris, Société africaine d'édition, 1972.
Tadeusz Lewicki: West African Food in the Middle Ages: According to Arabic Sources, Cambridge University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0521102025
Joséphine N'Diaye Haas: Cuisine Sénégalaise, L'Harmattan.
Saurelle Diop: Cuisine sénégalaise d’hier et d’aujourd’hui
Youssou N'Dour: La Cuisine de ma mère, Minerva, 2004 ISBN 2830707486
Aminata Sow Fall: Un grain de vie et d'espérance, Éditions Françoise Truffaut, 2002 ISBN 2951661452
Pierre Thiam: Yolele! Recipes from the Heart of Senegal, Lake Isle Press Inc., 2008 ISBN 978-1891105388 (the cookbook was finalist of the IACP Julia Child Cookbook Award and a Special Jury Award Winner at The Gourmand World Cookbook in Paris).
Pierre Thiam: Senegal - Modern Senegalese Recipes from the Source to the Bowl, Lake Isle Press Inc., 2015.

See also
Gambian cuisine
Guinean cuisine
Mauritanian cuisine
List of African cuisines

References
External links
Senegal: Recipes and Menus from Africa, University of Pennsylvania
Senegal: Celtnet Recipes Senegal Recipes and Cookery

## List of museums in Senegal
This is a list of museums in Senegal.

List
Centre de Recherches et de Documentation du Sénégal (CRDS)
IFAN Museum of African Arts
Historical Museum of Senegal in Gorée
Maison des Esclaves de Gorée
Musée Boribana
Musée d'Art Africain
Musée de la Culture Diola
Musée de la Femme Henriette Bathily
Musée de la Mer
Musée des Forces Armées Senegalaise
Musée Géologique Africain
Musée Régional de Tambacounda
Musée Régional de Thiès
Musée Senghor Fondation

See also
List of museums

References
External links
Museums in Senegal (Archived December 3, 2010, at the Wayback Machine)