--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Honduras
FILE_NAME: country_honduras.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:46:17
----------------

# Honduras

## General Overview
Honduras, officially the Republic of Honduras, is a country in Central America. It is bordered to the west by Guatemala, to the southwest by El Salvador, to the southeast by Nicaragua, to the south by the Pacific Ocean at the Gulf of Fonseca, and to the north by the Gulf of Honduras, a large inlet of the Caribbean Sea. Its capital and largest city is Tegucigalpa.
Honduras was home to several important Mesoamerican cultures, most notably the Maya, before Spanish colonization in the 16th century. The Spanish introduced Catholicism and the Spanish language, along with numerous customs that have blended with the indigenous culture. Honduras became independent in 1821 and has since been a republic, although it has consistently endured much social strife and political instability, and remains one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere. In 1960, the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice.
The economy is primarily agricultural, making it vulnerable to natural disasters such as Hurricane Mitch in 1998. Honduras has a Human Development Index of 0.624, ranking 138th in the world. In 2022, according to the National Institute of Statistics of Honduras, 73% of the country's population lived in poverty, and 53% lived in extreme poverty. The lower class is primarily agriculturally based while wealth is concentrated in the urban centers. The country is one of the most economically unequal in Latin America. Honduran society is predominantly Mestizo; however, there are also significant Indigenous, Black, and White communities.
In the early 20th century, Honduras was dominated by transnational agricultural companies, whose interests were protected militarily by the United States. The term "banana republic" was originally coined to describe Honduras's politically unstable, corporate-dominated democracy. The civilian government was overthrown in a 1963 military coup, and the nation returned to civilian rule in 1979. The United States re-established its military presence in Honduras in the 1980s, using Honduras as a base of operations to oppose the Nicaraguan government in the Contra war.
A 2009 military coup toppled the government of Manuel Zelaya, and controversy arose from claims of electoral fraud in the subsequent 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. In 2021 Xiomara Castro was elected to the presidency, returning the left to power for the first time since the 2009 coup. Nasry Asfura won the 2025 election amid claims of fraud and electoral interference by the United States.
Honduras spans about 112,492 km2 (43,433 sq mi) and has a population exceeding 10 million. Its northern portions are part of the western Caribbean zone, as reflected in the area's demographics and culture. Honduras is known for its rich natural resources, including minerals, coffee, tropical fruit, and sugar cane, as well as for its growing textiles industry, which serves the international market.

Etymology
The literal meaning of the Spanish term honduras is 'depths'. The name could refer either to the bay of Trujillo as an anchorage, fondura in the Leonese dialect of Spain, or to Christopher Columbus's alleged quote that "Gracias a Dios que hemos salido de esas honduras" ("Thank God we have departed from those depths").
It was not until the end of the 16th century that Honduras was used for the whole province. Prior to 1580, Honduras referred to only the eastern part of the province, and Higueras referred to the western part. Another early name is Guaymuras, revived as the name for the political dialogue in 2009 that took place in Honduras as opposed to Costa Rica.
Hondurans are often referred to as either the masculine catracho or the feminine catracha in Spanish.

History
Pre-colonial period
In the pre-Columbian era, the territory was split between two pan-cultural regions: Mesoamerica in the west and the Isthmo-Colombian area in the east. Each complex had a "core area" within Honduras (the Sula Valley for Mesoamerica, and La Mosquitia for the Isthmo-Colombian area), and the intervening area was one of gradual transition. However, these concepts had no meaning in the Pre-Columbian era and represent diverse areas. The Lenca people of the interior highlands are also generally considered to be culturally Mesoamerican, though the extent of linkage with other areas varied over time (for example, expanding during the zenith of the Toltec Empire).
In the extreme west, Maya civilization flourished for hundreds of years. The dominant, best known, and best studied state was in Copán, which was located in a mainly non-Maya area, or on the frontier between Maya and non-Maya areas. Copán declined with other Lowland centres during the conflagrations of the Terminal Classic in the 9th century. The Maya of this civilization survive in western Honduras as the Ch'orti', isolated from their Choltian linguistic peers to the west.
However, Copán represents only a fraction of the pre-Columbian history, with remnants of other civilizations throughout the country. Archaeologists have studied sites such as Naco and La Sierra in the Naco Valley, Los Naranjos on Lake Yojoa, Yarumela in the Comayagua Valley, La Ceiba and Salitron Viejo (both now under the Cajón Dam reservoir), Selin Farm and Cuyamel in the Aguan valley, Cerro Palenque, Travesia, Curruste, Ticamaya, Despoloncal, and Playa de los Muertos in the lower Ulúa River valley, and many others.
In 2012, LiDAR scanning revealed that several previously unknown high density settlements existed in La Mosquitia, corresponding to the legend of "La Ciudad Blanca". Excavation and study has since improved knowledge of the region's history. It is estimated that these settlements reached their zenith from 500 to 1000 AD.

Spanish conquest (1524–1539)
On his fourth and the final voyage to the New World in 1502, Columbus landed near the modern town of Trujillo, near Guaimoreto Lagoon, becoming the first European to visit the Bay Islands. On 30 July 1502, Columbus sent his brother Bartholomew to explore the islands, and Bartholomew encountered a Mayan trading vessel from Yucatán, carrying well-dressed Maya and a rich cargo. Bartholomew's men stole the cargo and kidnapped the ship's elderly captain to serve as an interpreter in the first recorded encounter between the Spanish and the Maya.
In March 1524, Gil González Dávila became the first Spaniard to enter Honduras as a conquistador. followed by Hernán Cortés, who had brought forces down from Mexico. Much of the conquest took place in the following two decades, first by groups loyal to Cristóbal de Olid, and then by those loyal to Francisco de Montejo but most particularly by those following Alvarado. In addition to Spanish resources, the conquerors relied heavily on armed forces from Mexico – Tlaxcalans and Mexica armies of thousands who remained garrisoned in the region.
Resistance to conquest was led in particular by Lempira. Many regions in the north of Honduras never fell to the Spanish, notably the Miskito Kingdom. After the Spanish conquest, Honduras became part of Spain's vast empire in the New World within the Kingdom of Guatemala. Trujillo and Gracias were the first city-capitals. The Spanish ruled the region for approximately three centuries.

Spanish Honduras (1524–1821)
Honduras was organized as a province of the Kingdom of Guatemala, and the capital was first at Trujillo on the Atlantic coast and later at Comayagua, and finally at Tegucigalpa in the central part of the country.
Silver mining was a key factor in the Spanish conquest and settlement of Honduras. Initially the mines were worked by local people through the encomienda system, but as disease and resistance made this option less available, slaves from other parts of Central America were brought in. When local slave trading stopped at the end of the 16th century, African slaves, mostly from Angola, were imported. After about 1650, very few slaves or other outside workers arrived in Honduras.
Although the Spanish conquered the southern or Pacific portion of Honduras fairly quickly, they were less successful on the northern (Atlantic) side. They managed to found a few towns along the coast—at Puerto Caballos and Trujillo in particular—but failed to conquer the eastern portion of the region and many pockets of independent indigenous people as well. The Miskito Kingdom in the northeast was particularly effective at resisting conquest, which found support from northern European privateers, pirates and especially the British formerly English colony of Jamaica, which placed much of the area under its protection after 1740.

Independence (1821)
Honduras gained independence from Spain in 1821 and was a part of the First Mexican Empire until 1823, when it became part of the United Provinces of Central America. It has been an independent republic and has held regular elections since 1838. In the 1840s and 1850s Honduras participated in several failed attempts at Central American unity, such as the Confederation of Central America (1842–1845), the covenant of Guatemala (1842), the Diet of Sonsonate (1846), the Diet of Nacaome (1847) and National Representation in Central America (1849–1852). Although Honduras eventually adopted the name Republic of Honduras, the unionist ideal never waned, and Honduras was one of the Central American countries that pushed hardest for a policy of regional unity.
Policies favoring international trade and investment began in the 1870s. Foreign interests became involved, first in shipping from the north coast, especially tropical fruit and most notably bananas, and then in building railroads. Comayagua was the capital until 1880, when the capital moved to Tegucigalpa. In 1888, a projected railroad line from the Caribbean coast to Tegucigalpa ran out of money when it reached San Pedro Sula. As a result, San Pedro grew into the nation's primary industrial center and second-largest city. Since independence, nearly 300 small internal rebellions and civil wars have occurred, including some changes of régime.

20th century and the role of American companies
In the late 19th century, Honduras granted land and substantial exemptions to several US-based fruit and infrastructure companies in return for developing the country's northern regions. Thousands of workers came to the north coast as a result to work in banana plantations and other businesses that grew up around the export industry. Banana-exporting companies, dominated until 1930 by the Cuyamel Fruit Company, as well as the United Fruit Company, and Standard Fruit Company, built an enclave economy in northern Honduras, controlling infrastructure and creating self-sufficient, tax-exempt sectors that contributed relatively little to economic growth. American troops landed in Honduras in 1903, 1907, 1911, 1912, 1919, 1924 and 1925.
American writer O. Henry coined the term "banana republic" in his 1904 novel Cabbages and Kings to describe a fictional country, Anchuria, that was inspired by his experiences in Honduras, where he had lived for six months. In The Admiral, one of the interlinking stories from which he composed the novel, O. Henry refers to Anchuria as a "small maritime banana republic"; naturally, the fruit was the entire basis of its economy. According to a literary analyst writing for The Economist, "his phrase neatly conjures up the image of a tropical, agrarian country. But its real meaning is sharper: it refers to the fruit companies from the United States that came to exert extraordinary influence over the politics of Honduras and its neighbors." In addition to drawing Central American workers north, the fruit companies encouraged immigration of workers from the English-speaking Caribbean, notably Jamaica and Belize, which introduced an African-descended, English-speaking and largely Protestant population into the country, although many of these workers left following changes to immigration law in 1939.
Constitutional crises in the 1940s led to reforms in the 1950s. One reform gave workers permission to organize, and a 1954 general strike paralyzed the northern part of the country for more than two months, but led to reforms. A 1963 military coup unseated democratically elected President Ramón Villeda Morales. In 1960, the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice.

War and upheaval (1969–1999)
In 1969, Honduras and El Salvador fought what became known as the Football War. Border tensions led to acrimony between the two countries after Honduran President Oswaldo López Arellano blamed the deteriorating economy on immigrants from El Salvador. The relationship reached a low when El Salvador met Honduras for a three-round football elimination match preliminary to the World Cup. On 14 July the Salvadoran army invaded Honduras. The Organization of American States negotiated a cease-fire which took effect on 20 July and brought about a withdrawal of Salvadoran troops in early August. Contributing factors to the conflict were a boundary dispute and the presence of thousands of Salvadorans living in Honduras illegally. After the week-long war, as many as 130,000 Salvadoran immigrants were expelled.

Hurricane Fifi caused severe damage when it skimmed the northern coast on 18 and 19 September 1974. Following Fifi, Presidents Melgar Castro and Policarpo Paz García largely built the current physical infrastructure and telecommunications system of Honduras. In 1979, the country returned to civilian rule. A constituent assembly was popularly elected in April 1980 to write a new constitution, and general elections were held in November 1981. The constitution was approved in 1982 and the PLH government of Roberto Suazo won the election with a promise to carry out an ambitious program of economic and social development to tackle an economic recession. He launched ambitious social and economic development projects sponsored by American development aid. Honduras became host to the largest Peace Corps mission in the world, and nongovernmental and international voluntary agencies proliferated. The Peace Corps withdrew its volunteers in 2012, citing safety concerns.
During the early 1980s, the United States established a continuing military presence in Honduras to support El Salvador, the Contra guerrillas fighting the Nicaraguan government, and also develop an airstrip and modern port in Honduras. Though spared the bloody civil wars wracking its neighbors, the Honduran Army quietly waged campaigns against Marxist–Leninist militias such as the Cinchoneros Popular Liberation Movement, notorious for kidnappings and bombings, and against many non-militants. The operation included a campaign of extrajudicial killings by government units, most notably the CIA-trained Battalion 316. Honduras was found internationally liable for a series of enforced disappearances during this time period, culminating in Velásquez Rodríguez v. Honduras.
In 1998, Hurricane Mitch caused massive and widespread destruction. President Carlos Roberto Flores said that 50 years of progress in the country had been reversed. Mitch destroyed about 70% of the crops and an estimated 70–80% of the transportation infrastructure, including nearly all bridges and secondary roads. Across Honduras 33,000 houses were destroyed, and an additional 50,000 damaged. Some 5,000 people killed, and 12,000 more injured. Total losses were estimated at US$3 billion.

21st century
In 2007, President Manuel Zelaya and President of the United States George W. Bush began talks on US assistance to Honduras to tackle the growing drug cartels in the Mosquito Coast region using US special forces. This marked the beginning of a new foothold for the US military's continued presence in Central America.

Under Zelaya, Honduras joined ALBA in 2008 but withdrew in 2010 after the 2009 Honduran coup d'état. In 2009 a constitutional crisis resulted when power was transferred in a coup from the president to the head of Congress. The OAS suspended Honduras because it did not regard its government as legitimate. Countries around the world, the OAS, and the United Nations formally and unanimously condemned the action as a coup d'état, refusing to recognize the de facto government, even though the lawyers consulted by the Library of Congress submitted to the United States Congress an opinion that declared the coup legal. The Honduran Supreme Court also ruled that the proceedings had been legal. The government that followed the de facto government established a truth and reconciliation commission, Comisión de la Verdad y Reconciliación, which after more than a year of research and debate concluded that the ousting had been a coup d'état and therefore illegal in the commission's opinion.
President Juan Orlando Hernández took office in 2014. After managing to stand for a second term, a very close election in 2017 left uncertainty as to whether Hernandez or his main challenger, television personality Salvador Nasralla, had prevailed. The disputed election caused protests and violence. Hernández was declared the winner of the election after a partial recount. 
The former first lady Xiomara Castro, leftist presidential candidate of opposition Liberty and Refoundation Party, won 53% of the votes in the 2021 presidential election to become the first female president of Honduras, bringing an end to the 12-year reign of the right-wing National Party. Her husband Manuel Zelaya held the same office from 2006 until 2009. Castro's government re-nationalized the nation's telecommunications and energy industries, subsidized electricity, education and school meals for more than a million impoverished families, and extended financial aid to students and the elderly. The government made major investments in the construction of eight new hospitals and in the electricity grid. The government also focused on shutting down special economic zones. The Castro government sought to diversify Honduras's agricultural production by incentivizing farmers to grow food in addition to cash crops through low-interest loans, domestic production quotas, and investments in the agricultural sector. Castro's Libre party was not able to gain control of congress and was consequently unable to nationalize private land, leading to protests and dissatisfaction among the rural poor.
In April 2022, former President Juan Orlando Hernández, who had served two terms between 2014 and January 2022, was extradited to the United States to face charges of drug trafficking and money laundering. In 2025 Hernández was pardoned by the Trump administration. Nasry Asfura was declared the winner of the 2025 Honduran election, with Castro and both of Asfura's opponents, Salvador Nasralla and Rixi Moncada, alleging fraud. Roughly 14.5% of the electoral tally sheets contained inconsistencies and required a review. On 27 January 2026,  Nasry Asfura was sworn in as president.

Geography
The north coast of Honduras borders the Caribbean Sea, and the Pacific Ocean lies south through the Gulf of Fonseca. Honduras consists mainly of mountains, with narrow plains along the coasts. A large undeveloped lowland jungle, La Mosquitia, lies in the northeast and the heavily populated lowland Sula valley in the northwest. 
The Islas de la Bahía and the Swan Islands are off the north coast. Misteriosa Bank and Rosario Bank, 130 to 150 kilometres (81 to 93 miles) north of the Swan Islands, fall within the exclusive economic zone of Honduras. Natural resources include timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore, antimony, coal, fish, shrimp, and hydropower.

Climate
The climate varies from tropical in the lowlands to temperate in the mountains. The Pacific coast is generally drier than the Caribbean.

Biodiversity
The region is considered a biodiversity hotspot because of the many plant and animal species found there. Like other countries in the region, it contains vast biological resources, with more than 6,000 species of vascular plants, of which 630 (described so far) are orchids; around 250 reptiles and amphibians; more than 700 bird species; and 110 mammalian species, of which half are bats. In the northeastern region of La Mosquitia lies the Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve, a lowland rainforest which is home to a great diversity of life. The reserve became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982.
Honduras has rain forests, cloud forests (which can rise up to nearly 3,000 metres or 9,800 feet above sea level), mangroves, savannas and mountain ranges with pine and oak trees, and the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System. In the Bay Islands there are bottlenose dolphins, manta rays, parrot fish, schools of blue tang and whale shark.
Deforestation resulting from logging is rampant in Olancho Department. The clearing of land for agriculture is prevalent in the largely undeveloped La Mosquitia region, causing land degradation and soil erosion. Honduras had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.48/10, ranking it 126th globally out of 172 countries. Lake Yojoa, which is Honduras's largest source of fresh water, is polluted by heavy metals produced from mining activities. Some rivers and streams are also polluted by mining.

Government and politics
Honduras is governed within a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic. The President of Honduras is both head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the Honduran government. Legislative power is vested in the National Congress of Honduras. The judiciary is independent of both the executive branch and the legislature.
The National Congress of Honduras (Congreso Nacional) has 128 members (diputados), elected for a four-year term by proportional representation. Congressional seats are assigned the parties' candidates on a departmental basis in proportion to the number of votes each party receives.

Political culture
Following the 1963 military coup, a string of authoritarian military governments held power uninterrupted until 1981, when Roberto Suazo Córdova was elected president. The party system was dominated by the conservative National Party of Honduras (Partido Nacional de Honduras: PNH) and the liberal Liberal Party of Honduras (Partido Liberal de Honduras: PLH) until the 2009 Honduran coup d'état removed Zelaya from office and put Roberto Micheletti in his place.
In late 2012, 1,540 persons were interviewed by ERIC in collaboration with the Jesuit university, as reported by Associated Press. The survey found that 60% believed the police were involved in crime, 45% had "no confidence" in the Supreme Court, and 72% thought there was electoral fraud in the primary elections of November 2012. Also, 56% expected the presidential, legislative and municipal elections of 2013 to be fraudulent.

Administrative divisions
Honduras is divided into 18 departments. The capital city is Tegucigalpa in the Central District within the department of Francisco Morazán.

Atlántida
Choluteca
Colón
Comayagua
Copán
Cortés
El Paraíso
Francisco Morazán
Gracias a Dios
Intibucá
Bay Islands
La Paz
Lempira
Ocotepeque
Olancho
Santa Bárbara
Valle
Yoro
A new administrative division called ZEDE (Zonas de empleo y desarrollo económico) was created in 2013. ZEDEs have a high level of autonomy with their own political system at a judicial, economic and administrative level, and are based on free market capitalism.

Foreign relations
Honduras and Nicaragua had tense relations throughout 2000 and early 2001 due to a boundary dispute off the Atlantic coast. Nicaragua imposed a 35% tariff against Honduran goods due to the dispute.
In June 2009 a coup d'état ousted President Zelaya; he was taken in a military aircraft to Costa Rica. The General Assembly of the United Nations voted to denounce the coup and called for the restoration of Zelaya. Several Latin American nations, including Mexico, temporarily severed diplomatic relations with Honduras. In July 2010, full diplomatic relations were once again re-established with Mexico. The United States sent out mixed messages after the coup; U.S. President Obama called the ouster a coup and expressed support for Zelaya's return to power. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton—advised by John Negroponte, the former Reagan-era ambassador to Honduras implicated in the Iran–Contra affair—refrained from expressing support. She later explained that the US would have had to cut aid if it called Zelaya's ouster a military coup, although the US has a record of ignoring these events when it chooses. Zelaya had expressed an interest in Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez' Bolivarian Alliance for Peoples of our America (ALBA) and had actually joined in 2008. After the 2009 coup, Honduras withdrew its membership.
This interest in regional agreements may have increased the alarm of establishment politicians. When Zelaya began calling for a "fourth ballot box" to determine whether Hondurans wished to convoke a special constitutional congress, this sounded a lot to some like the constitutional amendments that had extended the terms of both Chávez and Bolivian president Evo Morales. "Chávez has served as a role model for like-minded leaders intent on cementing their power. These presidents are barely in office when they typically convene a constitutional convention to guarantee their reelection," said a 2009 Spiegel International analysis, which noted that one reason to join ALBA was discounted Venezuelan oil. In addition to Chávez and Morales, Argentinian presiden Carlos Menem, Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and Colombian President Álvaro Uribe had all taken this step, and Washington and the EU were both accusing the Sandinista National Liberation Front government in Nicaragua of tampering with election results. Politicians of all stripes expressed opposition to Zelaya's referendum proposal, and the attorney-general accused him of violating the constitution. The Honduran Supreme Court agreed, saying that the constitution had put the Supreme Electoral Tribunal in charge of elections and referendums, not the National Statistics Institute, which Zelaya had proposed to have run the count. Whether or not Zelaya's removal from power had constitutional elements, the Honduran constitution explicitly protects all Hondurans from forced expulsion from Honduras.
The United States maintains a small military presence at one Honduran base. The two countries conduct joint miltary exercises in peacekeeping, counter-narcotics, humanitarian, disaster relief, as well as humanitarian, medical and civic action. U.S. troops conduct and provide logistics support for a variety of bilateral and multilateral exercises. The United States is Honduras's chief trading partner.
Honduras has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.

Military
Honduras has an army, a navy and an air force. In 2017, Honduras signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

Economy
Poverty
The World Bank categorizes Honduras as a low middle-income nation. The per capita income is around US$4,000, making it one of the lowest in North America and Central America. In 2016, more than 66% of the population was living below the poverty line.
Economic growth has averaged 7% per year, one of the highest rates in Latin America as of 2010. Despite this, Honduras has seen the least development amongst all Central American countries. Honduras is ranked 130 of 188 countries with a Human Development Index of .625 that classifies the nation as having medium development (2015). The three factors that go into HDI (an extended and healthy life, accessibility of knowledge and standard of living) have all improved since 1990 but still remain relatively low with life expectancy at birth being 73.3, expected years of schooling being 11.2 (mean of 6.2 years) and GNI per capita being $4,466 (2015). The HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.751 with life expectancy at birth being 68.6, expected years of schooling being 11.5 (mean of 6.6) and GNI per capita being $6,281 (2015).
The 2009 Honduran coup d'état led to a variety of economic trends in the nation. Overall growth averaged 5.7 percent from 2006 to 2008 but slowed to 3.5 percent annually between 2010 and 2013. The nation saw a poverty increase of 13.2 percent and in extreme poverty of 26.3 percent in just 3 years. Furthermore, unemployment grew between 2008 and 2012 from 6.8 percent to 14.1 percent.
Because much of the economy is based on small scale agriculture of only a few exports, natural disasters have a particularly devastating impact. Natural disasters, such as 1998 Hurricane Mitch, have contributed to this inequality as they particularly affect poor rural areas. Additionally, they are a large contributor to food insecurity in the country as farmers are left unable to provide for their families. A study done by Honduras NGO, World Neighbors, determined the terms "increased workload, decreased basic grains, expensive food, and fear" were most associated with Hurricane Mitch.
The rural and urban poor were hit hardest by Hurricane Mitch. Those in southern and western regions specifically were considered most vulnerable as they both were subject to environmental destruction and home to many subsistence farmers. The agricultural economic sector has declined a third in the past 20 years, mostly representing a decline in exports, such as bananas and coffee, that were affected by natural disasters. Indigenous communities along the Patuca River were hit hard as well. The mid-Pataca region was almost completely destroyed. Over 80% of rice harvest and all of banana, plantain, and manioc harvests were lost. Relief and reconstruction efforts following the storm were partial and incomplete, reinforcing existing levels of poverty rather than reversing those levels, especially for indigenous communities. The period between the end of food donations and the following harvest led to extreme hunger, causing deaths amongst the Tawahka population. Those that were considered the most "land-rich" lost 36% of their total land on average. Those that were the most "land-poor", lost less total land but a greater share of their overall total. This meant that those hit hardest were single women as they constitute the majority of this population.

Poverty reduction strategies
Since the 1970s when Honduras was designated a "food priority country" by the UN, organizations such as World Food Programme (WFP) have worked to decrease malnutrition and food insecurity. Currently one fourth of children are affected by chronic malnutrition. WFP is currently working with the Honduran government on a school feeding program which provides meals for 21,000 schools, reaching 1.4 million school children. WFP also participates in disaster relief through reparations and emergency response in order to aid in quick recovery that tackles the effects of natural disasters on agricultural production.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy was implemented in 1999 and aimed to cut extreme poverty in half by 2015. While spending on poverty-reduction aid increased, there was only a 2.5% increase in GDP between 1999 and 2002. This improvement left Honduras still below that of countries that lacked aid through Poverty Reduction Strategy behind those without it. The World Bank believes that this inefficiency stems from a lack of focus on infrastructure and rural development. Extreme poverty saw a low of 36.2 percent only two years after the implementation of the strategy but then increased to 66.5 percent by 2012. 
Poverty Reduction Strategies were intended to affect social policy through increased investment in education and health sectors. This was expected to lift poor communities out of poverty while also increasing the workforce as a means of stimulating the Honduran economy. Conditional cash transfers were used to do this by the Family Assistance Program. This program was restructured in 1998 in an attempt to increase effectiveness of cash transfers for health and education specifically for those in extreme poverty. Overall spending within Poverty Reduction Strategies have been focused on education and health sectors increasing social spending from 44% of Honduras's GDP in 2000 to 51% in 2004.
Critics of aid from International Finance Institutions believe that the World Bank's Poverty Reduction Strategy result in little substantive change to Honduran policy. Poverty Reduction Strategies also excluded clear priorities, specific intervention strategy, strong commitment to the strategy and more effective macro-level economic reforms according to Jose Cuesta of Cambridge University. Due to this he believes that the strategy did not provide a pathway for economic development that could lift Honduras out of poverty resulting in neither lasting economic growth of poverty reduction.
Prior to its 2009 coup Honduras widely expanded social spending and an extreme increase in minimum wage. Efforts to decrease inequality were swiftly reversed following the coup. When Zelaya was removed from office social spending as a percent of GDP decreased from 13.3 percent in 2009 to 10.9 recent in 2012. This decrease in social spending exacerbated the effects of the recession, which the nation was previously relatively well equipped to deal with.

Economic inequality
Levels of income inequality are higher than in any other Latin American country. Unlike other Latin American countries, inequality steadily increased between 1991 and 2005. Between 2006 and 2010 inequality saw a decrease but increased again in 2010.
When the Human Development Index is adjusted for inequality (known as the IHDI) Honduras's development index is reduced to .443. The levels of inequality in each aspect of development can also be assessed. In 2015 inequality of life expectancy at birth was 19.6%, inequality in education was 24.4% and inequality in income was 41.5%  The overall loss in human development due to inequality was 29.2.
The IHDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.575 with an overall loss of 23.4%. In 2015 inequality of life expectancy at birth was 22.9%, inequality in education was 14.0%, and inequality in income was 34.9%. While Honduras has a higher life expectancy (before and after inequality adjustments), its quality of education and economic standard of living are lower. Income inequality and education inequality have a large impact on the overall development of the nation.
Inequality also exists between rural and urban areas as it relates to the distribution of resources. Poverty is concentrated in southern, eastern, and western regions where rural and indigenous peoples live. North and central Honduras are home to the country's industries and infrastructure, resulting in lower levels of poverty. Poverty is concentrated in rural Honduras, a pattern that is reflected throughout Latin America. The effects of poverty on rural communities are vast. Poor communities typically live in adobe homes, lack material resources, have limited access to medical resources, and live off of basics such as rice, maize and beans.
The lower class predominantly consists of rural subsistence farmers and landless peasants. Since 1965 there has been an increase in the number of landless peasants in Honduras which has led to a growing class of urban poor individuals. These individuals often migrate to urban centers in search of work in the service sector, manufacturing, or construction. Demographers believe that without social and economic reform, rural to urban migration will increase, resulting in the expansion of urban centers. Within the lower class, underemployment is a major issue. Individuals that are underemployed often only work as part-time laborers on seasonal farms meaning their annual income remains low. In the 1980s peasant organizations and labor unions such as the National Federation of Honduran Peasants, The National Association of Honduran Peasants and the National Union of Peasants formed.

It is not uncommon for rural individuals to voluntarily enlist in the military, however this often does not offer stable or promising career opportunities. The majority of high-ranking officials in the army are recruited from military academies. Additionally, the majority of enlistment in the military is forced, which largely relies on an alliance between the government, military and the upper class. In urban areas males are often sought out from secondary schools while in rural areas roadblocks aided the military in handpicking recruits. Higher socio-economic status enables individuals to more easily evade the draft.
The middle class is a small group defined by relatively low income levels. Movement from lower to middle class is typically facilitated by higher education. Professionals, students, farmers, merchants, business employees, and civil servants are all considered a part of the middle class. Opportunities for employment and the industrial and commercial sectors are slow-growing, limiting the middle class. The upper class has much higher income levels, reflecting large amounts of income inequality. Much of the upper class affords their success to the growth of cotton and livestock exports post-World War II. The wealthy are not politically unified and differ in political and economic views.

Trade
The currency is the Honduran lempira. In 2005 Honduras signed CAFTA, a free trade agreement with the United States. In December 2005, Puerto Cortés, the primary seaport of Honduras, was included in the U.S. Container Security Initiative. Gold, silver, lead and zinc are mined.
The government operates both the electrical grid, Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE) and the land-line telephone service, Hondutel. ENEE receives heavy subsidies to counter its chronic financial problems, but Hondutel is no longer a monopoly. The telecommunication sector was opened to private investment in 2005, as required under CAFTA. The price of petroleum is regulated, and the Congress often ratifies temporary price regulation for basic commodities.
In 2006 the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Energy announced the first phase of the Secure Freight Initiative), which built upon existing port security measures, gives the U.S. government enhanced authority, allowing it to scan containers from overseas for nuclear and radiological materials in order to improve the risk assessment of individual US-bound containers. The Secure Freight Initiative is in place in Puerto Cortés.
For economic development a 2012 memorandum of understanding with a group of international investors obtained Honduran government approval to build a zone (city) with its own laws, tax system, judiciary and police, but opponents brought a suit against it in the Supreme Court, calling it a "state within a state". In 2013, Congress ratified Decree 120, which led to the establishment of Zone for Employment and Economic Development. The government began construction of the first zones in June 2015.

Energy
About half of the electricity sector in Honduras is privately owned. The remaining generation capacity is run by ENEE (Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica).
Key challenges in the sector are:

Financing investments in generation and transmission without either a financially healthy utility or concessionary funds from external donors
Re-balancing tariffs, cutting arrears and reducing losses, including electricity theft, without social unrest
Reconciling environmental concerns with government objectives – two large new dams and associated hydropower plants.
Improving access to electricity in rural areas.

Transportation
Infrastructure for transport in Honduras consists of: 699 kilometres (434 miles) of railways; 13,603 kilometres (8,453 miles) of roadways; six ports; and 112 airports altogether (12 Paved, 100 unpaved). The Ministry of Public Works, Transport and Housing is responsible for transport sector policy.

Demographics
Honduras had a population of 10,278,345 in 2021. The proportion of the population below age 15 in 2010 was 36.8%; 58.9% were between 15 and 65 years old, and 4.3% were 65 years old or older.
Since 1975, emigration from Honduras has accelerated as economic migrants and political refugees sought a better life elsewhere. A majority of expatriate Hondurans live in the United States. A 2012 US State Department estimate suggested that between 800,000 and one million Hondurans lived in the United States at that time, nearly 15% of the Honduran population. The large uncertainty about numbers is because numerous Hondurans live in the United States without a visa. In the 2010 census in the United States, 617,392 residents identified as Hondurans, up from 217,569 in 2000.

Largest cities
Race and ethnicity
According to the 2013 census, the ethnic breakdown was 83% mestizo, 8% white, 7% indigenous (primarily Lenca), and 2% black. The 1927 Honduran census provides no racial data, but in 1930 five classifications were created: white, Indian, Negro, yellow, and mestizo. This system was used in the 1935 and 1940 census. Mestizo was used to describe individuals that did not fit neatly into the categories of white, American Indian, negro or yellow or who are of mixed white-American Indian descent.
John Gillin considers Honduras to be one of 13 "Mestizo countries" (Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, Cuba, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay). He claims that in much of Spanish America little attention is paid to race and race mixture resulting in social status having little reliance on one's physical features. However, in "Mestizo countries," this is not the case. Social stratification from Spain was able to develop in these countries through colonization.
During colonization the majority of the indigenous population died of diseases like smallpox and measles resulting in a more homogenous indigenous population compared to other colonies. Nine indigenous and African groups are recognized by the government. The majority of Amerindians are Lenca, followed by the Miskito, Cho'rti', Tolupan, Pech and Sumo. Around 50,000 Lenca individuals live in the west and western interior, while the other small native groups are located throughout the country.
The majority of blacks are ladino, meaning they are culturally Latino. Non-ladino groups include the Garifuna, Miskito, Bay Island Creoles, and Arab immigrants. The Garifunas descended from freed slaves on Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The Bay Island Creoles are the descendants of freed African slaves from the British Empire, which administered the Bay Islands from early 17th century to 1850. The Creoles, the Garinagu, and the Miskitos are racially diverse. While the Garinagu and Miskitos have similar origins, Garifunas are considered black while Miskitos are considered indigenous. This is largely a reflection of cultural differences, as Garinagu have retained much of their original African culture. The majority of Arab Hondurans are of Palestinian and Lebanese descent. They are known as "turcos" because of migration during the rule of the Ottoman Empire. They have maintained cultural distinctiveness and prospered economically.

Gender
The male to female ratio is 1.01. This ratio stands at 1.05 at birth, 1.04 from 15 to 24 years old, 1.02 from 25 to 54 years old, .88 from 55 to 64 years old, and .77 for those 65 years or older. The Gender Development Index (GDI) was .942 in 2015 with an HDI of .600 for females and .637 for males. Life expectancy at birth for males is 70.9 and 75.9 for females. Expected years of schooling is 10.9 years for males (mean of 6.1) and 11.6 for females (mean of 6.2). These measures do not reveal a large disparity between male and female development levels, however, GNI per capita is vastly different by gender. Males have a GNI per capita of $6,254 while that of females is only $2,680. Honduras's overall GDI is higher than that of other medium HDI nations (.871) but lower than the overall HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean (.981).
The United Nations Development Program ranks Honduras 116th for measures including women's political power, and female access to resources. The Gender Inequality Index (GII)depicts gender-based inequalities according to reproductive health, empowerment, and economic activity. Honduras has a GII of .461 and ranked 101 of 159 countries in 2015. 25.8% of parliament is female, and 33.4% of adult females have a secondary education or higher while 31.1% of adult males do. Despite this, while male participation in the labor market is 84.4, female participation is 47.2%. The maternal mortality ratio is 129, and the adolescent birth rate is 65.0 for women ages 15–19.
Familialism and machismo carry a lot of weight within society. Familialism refers to the idea of individual interests being second to that of the family, most often in relation to dating and marriage, abstinence, and parental approval and supervision of dating. Aggression and proof of masculinity through physical dominance are characteristic of machismo. Honduras has historically functioned with a patriarchal system like many other Latin American countries. Men claim responsibility for family decisions including reproductive health decisions. Recently Honduras has seen an increase in challenges to this notion as feminist movements and access to global media increases. There has been an increase in educational attainment, labor force participating, urban migration, late-age marriage, and contraceptive use amongst women.
Between 1971 and 2001 total fertility rate decreased from 7.4 births to 4.4 births. This is largely attributable to an increase in educational attainment and workforce participation by women, as well as more widespread use of contraceptives. In 1996 50% of women were using at least one type of contraceptive. By 2001 62% were largely due to female sterilization, birth control in the form of a pill, injectable birth control, and IUDs. A study done in 2001 reflects conceptualization of reproductive health and decision making in Honduras; 28% of men and 25% of women surveyed believed men were responsible for decisions regarding family size and family planning uses; 21% of men believed men were responsible for both.
Sexual violence against women has proven to be a large issue that has caused many to migrate to the U.S. The prevalence of child sexual abuse was 7.8% with the majority of reports being from children under age 11. Women that experienced sexual abuse as children were found to be twice as likely to be in violent relationships. Femicide is widespread. In 2014, 40% of unaccompanied refugee minors were female. Gangs are largely responsible for sexual violence against women as they often use sexual violence. Between 2005 and 2013 according to the UN Special Repporteur on Violence Against Women, violent deaths increased 263.4 percent. Impunity for sexual violence and femicide crimes was 95 percent in 2014. Additionally, many girls are forced into human trafficking and prostitution.
Between 1995 and 1997 Honduras recognized domestic violence as both a public health issue and a punishable offense due to efforts by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). PAHO's subcommittee on Women, Health and Development was used as a guide to develop programs that aid in domestic violence prevention and victim assistance programs. However, a study done in 2009 showed that while the policy requires health care providers to report cases of sexual violence, emergency contraception, and victim referral to legal institutions and support groups, very few other regulations exist within the realm of registry, examination and follow-up. Unlike other Central American countries, Honduras does not have detailed guidelines requiring service providers to be extensively trained and respect the rights of sexual violence victims. Since the study was done the UNFPA and the Health Secretariat of Honduras have worked to develop and implement improved guidelines for handling cases of sexual violence.
An educational program known as Sistema de Aprendizaje Tutorial (SAT) has attempted to "undo gender" through focusing on gender equality in everyday interactions. The SAT program is one of the largest in the world, second only to Colombia's with 6,000 students. It is currently sponsored by Asociacion Bayan, a Honduran NGO, and the Ministry of Education. It functions by integrating gender into curriculum topics, linking gender to the ideas of justice and equality, encouraging reflection, dialogue and debate and emphasizing the need for individual and social change. This program was found to increase gender consciousness and a desire for gender equality amongst Honduran women through encouraging discourse surrounding existing gender inequality in the communities.

Languages
Spanish is the official, national language, spoken by virtually all Hondurans. In addition to Spanish, numerous indigenous languages are spoken in some small communities. Other languages spoken by some include Honduran sign language and Bay Islands Creole English.
The main indigenous languages are:

Garifuna (Arawakan) (almost 100,000 speakers in Honduras including monolinguals)
Mískito (Misumalpan) (29,000 speakers in Honduras)
Mayangna (Misumalpan) (less than 1000 speakers in Honduras, more in Nicaragua)
Pech/Paya, (Chibchan) (less than 1000 speakers)
Tol (Jicaquean) (less than 500 speakers)
Ch'orti' (Mayan) (less than 50 speakers)
The Lenca isolate lost all its fluent native speakers in the 20th century but is currently undergoing revival efforts among the members of the ethnic population of about 100,000. The largest immigrant languages are Arabic (42,000), Armenian (1,300), Turkish (900), Yue Chinese (1,000).

Religion
Historically, Honduras had been predominantly Catholic. Protestant Christianity is now the largest religion in Honduras. The 2025 CIA Factbook lists Honduras as 55% Protestant and 34% Catholic. The 2008 International Religious Freedom Report notes that 51.4% of the population identified themselves as Catholic, 36.2% as evangelical Protestant, 1.3% claiming to be from other religions, including Muslims, Buddhists, Jews, Rastafarians, etc. and 11.1% do not belong to any religion or unresponsive. 8% reported as being either atheistic or agnostic. Previous customary Catholic church tallies of membership, where priests (in more than 185 parishes) filled out a pastoral account of their parishes each year, estimated 81% Catholic.
Commenting on statistical variations everywhere, John Green of Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life notes "It isn't that ... numbers are more right than [someone else's] numbers ... but how one conceptualizes the group." Often people attend one church without giving up their "home" church. Many who attend evangelical megachurches in the US, for example, attend more than one church. This shifting and fluidity is common in Brazil where two-fifths of those who were raised evangelical are no longer evangelical and Catholics seem to shift in and out of various churches, often while still remaining Catholic.
Most pollsters suggest an annual poll taken over several years would provide the best method of knowing religious demographics and variations in any single country. Still, in Honduras are thriving Anglican, Presbyterian, Methodist, Seventh-day Adventist, Lutheran, Latter-day Saint (Mormon) and Pentecostal churches. There are Protestant seminaries. The Catholic Church maintains a presence through schools, hospitals, and pastoral institutions (including its own medical school) that it operates. Its archbishop, Cardinal Óscar Andrés Rodriguez Maradiaga, is also very popular with the government, other churches, and in his own church. Practitioners of the Buddhist, Jewish, Islamic, Baháʼí, Rastafari and indigenous denominations and religions exist.

Education
About 83.6% of the population are literate, and the net primary enrollment rate was 94% in 2004. In 2014, the primary school completion rate was 90.7%. Honduras has bilingual (Spanish and English) and even trilingual (Spanish with English, Arabic, or German) schools and numerous universities.
The higher education is governed by the National Autonomous University of Honduras which has centers in the large cities. Honduras was ranked 119th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Crime
Crime in Honduras is rampant, and criminals operate with a high degree of impunity. Honduras has one of the highest national murder rates in the world; cities such as San Pedro Sula and the Tegucigalpa have registered homicide rates among the highest in the world. The violence is associated with drug trafficking as Honduras is often a transit point, and with several urban gangs, mainly the MS-13 and the 18th Street gang. Homicide violence reached a peak in 2012 with an average of 20 homicides per day. Official statistics from the Honduran Observatory on National Violence show the homicide rate was 60 per 100,000 in 2015 with the majority of homicide cases unprosecuted. But as recently as 2017, organizations such as InSight Crime's show figures of 42 per 100,000 inhabitants, a 26% drop from 2016 figures.
Highway assaults and carjackings at roadblocks or checkpoints set up by criminals with police uniforms and equipment occur frequently. Although reports of kidnappings of foreigners are not common, families of kidnapping victims often pay ransoms without reporting the crime to police out of fear of retribution, so kidnapping figures may be underreported.
Violence increased after Plan Colombia was implemented and after Mexican President Felipe Calderón declared the war against drug trafficking in Mexico. Along with El Salvador and Guatemala, Honduras forms part of the Northern Triangle of Central America, which has been characterized as one of the most violent regions in the world. As a result of crime and increasing murder rates, the flow of migrants from Honduras to the U.S. also went up. The rise in violence in the region has received international attention.
Roatán and the other Bay Islands have lower crime rates than the mainland. This has been attributed to measures taken by government and business in 2014 to improve tourist safety. In the less populated region of Gracias a Dios, narcotics-trafficking is rampant and police presence is scarce. Threats against U.S. citizens by drug traffickers and other criminal organizations have resulted in the U.S. Embassy placing restrictions on the travel of U.S. officials through the region.

Culture
National symbols
The flag of Honduras is composed of three equal horizontal stripes. The blue upper and lower stripes represent the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. The central stripe is white. It contains five blue stars representing the five states of the Central American Union. The middle star represents Honduras, located in the center of the Central American Union.
The coat of arms was established in 1945. It is an equilateral triangle, at the base is a volcano between three castles, over which is a rainbow and the sun shining. The triangle is placed on an area that symbolizes being bathed by both seas. Around all of this an oval containing in golden lettering: "Republic of Honduras, Free, Sovereign and Independent".
The "National Anthem of Honduras" is a result of a contest carried out in 1914 during the presidency of Manuel Bonilla. Poet Augusto Coello wrote the anthem, with German-born Honduran composer Carlos Hartling writing the music. The anthem was officially adopted on 15 November 1915, during the presidency of Alberto de Jesús Membreño.
The national flower is the orchid Rhyncholaelia digbyana, which replaced the rose in 1969. The change of the national flower was carried out during the administration of general Oswaldo López Arellano, thinking that Brassavola digbyana "is an indigenous plant of Honduras; having this flower exceptional characteristics of beauty, vigor and distinction", as the decree dictates it.
The national tree was declared in 1928 to be simply "the Pine that appears symbolically in our Coat of Arms" (el Pino que figura simbólicamente en nuestro Escudo), even though pines comprise a genus and not a species, and even though legally there's no specification as for what kind of pine should appear in the coat of arms either. Because of its commonality in the country, the Pinus oocarpa species has become since then the species most strongly associated as the national tree, but legally it is not so. Another species associated as the national tree is the Pinus caribaea.
The national mammal is the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), which was adopted as a measure to avoid excessive depredation. It is one of two endemic species of deer. The national bird is the scarlet macaw (Ara macao). This bird was much valued by the pre-Columbian civilizations of Honduras.

Celebrations
National holidays include Honduras Independence Day on 15 September and Children's Day or Día del Niño, which is celebrated in homes, schools and churches on 10 September; on this day, children receive presents and have parties similar to Christmas or birthday celebrations. Some neighborhoods have piñatas on the street. Other holidays are Easter, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, Day of the Soldier (3 October to celebrate the birth of Francisco Morazán), Christmas, El Dia de Lempira on 20 July, and New Year's Eve.
Independence Day festivities start early in the morning with marching bands. Each band wears different colors and features cheerleaders. Fiesta Catracha takes place this same day: typical Honduran foods such as beans, tamales, baleadas, cassava with chicharrón, and tortillas are offered.
On Christmas Eve people reunite with their families and close friends to have dinner, then give out presents at midnight. In some cities fireworks are seen and heard at midnight. On New Year's Eve there is food and "cohetes", fireworks and festivities. Birthdays are also great events, and include piñatas filled with candies and surprises for the children.
La Ceiba Carnival is celebrated in La Ceiba in the north coast in the second half of May to celebrate the day of the city's patron saint Isidore. People from all over the world come for one week of festivities. Every night there is a little carnaval (carnavalito) in a neighborhood. On Saturday there is a big parade with floats and displays with people from many countries. This celebration is also accompanied by the Milk Fair, where many Hondurans come to show off their farm products and animals.

Art
The most renowned painter is José Antonio Velásquez. Other important painters include Carlos Garay, and Roque Zelaya. Notable writers include Lucila Gamero de Medina, Froylán Turcios, Ramón Amaya Amador and Juan Pablo Suazo Euceda, Marco Antonio Rosa, Roberto Sosa, Eduardo Bähr, Amanda Castro, Javier Abril Espinoza, Teófilo Trejo, and Roberto Quesada.
The José Francisco Saybe theater in San Pedro Sula is home to the Círculo Teatral Sampedrano (Theatrical Circle of San Pedro Sula) Honduras has experienced a boom from its film industry for the past two decades. Since the premiere of the movie "Anita la cazadora de insectos" in 2001, the level of Honduran productions has increased, many collaborating with countries such as Mexico, Colombia, and the United States. The most well known Honduran films are El Xendra, Amor y Frijoles, and Cafe con aroma a mi tierra.

Folklore
Legends and fairy tales are paramount, such as Lluvia de Peces (Rain of Fish). The legends of El Cadejo and La Llorona are also popular.

Music
Punta is the main music of Honduras, with other sounds such as Caribbean salsa, merengue, reggae, and reggaeton all widely heard, especially in the north, and Mexican rancheras heard in the rural interior of the country. The most well known musicians are Guillermo Anderson and Polache. Banda Blanca is a widely known music group in both Honduras and internationally.

Media
At least half of households have at least one television. Public television has a far smaller role than in most other countries. The main newspapers are La Prensa, El Heraldo, La Tribuna and Diario Tiempo. The official newspaper is La Gaceta.

Cuisine
Honduran cuisine is a fusion of indigenous Lenca cuisine, Spanish cuisine, Caribbean cuisine and African cuisine. There are also dishes from the Garifuna people. Coconut and coconut milk are featured in both sweet and savory dishes. Regional specialties include fried fish, tamales, carne asada and baleadas. Other popular dishes include meat roasted with chismol and carne asada, chicken with rice and corn, and fried fish with pickled onions and jalapeños. Some of the ways seafood and meats are prepared in coastal areas and in the Bay Islands involve coconut milk.
The soups Hondurans enjoy include bean soup, mondongo soup (tripe soup), seafood soups and beef soups. Generally these soups are served mixed with plantains, yuca, and cabbage, and served with corn tortillas. Other typical dishes are the montucas or corn tamales, stuffed tortillas, and tamales wrapped in plantain leaves. Honduran typical dishes also include an abundant selection of tropical fruits such as papaya, pineapple, plum, sapote, passion fruit and bananas which are prepared in many ways while they are still green.

Sports
Football is the most popular sport in Honduras. Honduras's first international competition began in 1921 at the Independence Centenary Games featuring neighboring countries in Central America. The highest division of football is The Honduran National Professional Football League (Spanish: La Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional de Honduras), which was established in 1964. The league is recognized on a continental level, as C.D. Olimpia–the only Honduran club to win the competition–won the CONCACAF Champions League in 1972 and 1988. The Honduras national football team (Spanish: Selección de fútbol de Honduras) is considered one of the best nations in North America, as the country last won the CONCACAF Gold Cup in 1981 and placed third in 2013. On a global scale, Honduras has competed in the FIFA World Cup three times in 1982, 2010, and 2014, although Los Catrachos have yet to win a game.
Baseball is the second most popular sport. Honduras's first international competition began in 1950 in the Baseball World Cup, which was the most prestigious global competition at the time. The country lacks a division in baseball, likely due to the absence of competition in international baseball since 1973. The Honduras national baseball team (Spanish: Selección de béisbol de Honduras) is shy of being a top ten nation in North and South America due to infrequent scheduling, although competition is consistent and growing at the youth level. Inspiration at the youth level came from Mauricio Dubón being the first born and raised Honduran to start in Major League Baseball, who is currently competing today.
All other sports tend to be minor at best, as Honduras has not won a medal in the Olympics and has not made notable results in other world championships. However, Hondurans have consistently entered track & field and swimming games at the Summer Olympics since 1968 and 1984, respectively. Occasionally, Honduras has competed in combat sports ranging from judo to boxing at the Summer Olympics as well. Gender inequality is present in the sports industry, as teams like the Honduras women's national football team (Spanish: Selección de fútbol de Honduras Femenina) has yet to qualify in global and continental tournaments and softball being nearly nonexistent in the country.

See also
Outline of Honduras
Water crisis in Honduras

Notes
References
External links

Official website President of the Government of Honduras (in Spanish)
Cabinet of Honduras (in Spanish)
National Congress of Honduras (in Spanish)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (in Spanish)
The Honduran Institute of Tourism (IHT), Official tourism site

## Tourism in Honduras
Honduras is a touristic destination that attracts visitors due to its natural environment, white and dark sand beaches, coral reefs, abundant flora and fauna, colonial era towns, and archaeological sites. Other attractions include the area's customs and traditional foods. In 2019 Honduras received 2.8 million foreigners, half of those tourists are cruise passengers.

History
The territory of modern Honduras was discovered in the fourth trip of Christopher Columbus between 1502 and 1503, at that time it was called Guaymuras or Hibueras by local Indians, was followed by the conquest of the inhabitants and later the exploration of land, which involves the making both geographic maps, as coastal charts and of navigation.
In 1526 the conquistador Don Hernán Cortés learned through díceres that in the jungle of the Honduran Mosquito Coast was a city of such splendor as Tenochtitlán, called here the Ciudad Blanca in which its buildings were completely white; Cortés undertook the trip to Honduras to find this great city, then in 1544 the Bishop of Comayagua, Fray Cristóbal de Pedraza assured having crossed the jungle of the Mosquitia and come to a white city. One of the explorers of Cortés was Captain Don Pedro de Alvarado the advanced was carrying many cartographers and clerks who recounted the exploits and discoveries on their trips, another character was Don Diego García de Palacios while He is exploring the landscapes and mountainous areas between Guatemala and Honduras, across the Motagua River he found the Maya city of Copán, he made many notes of the vestiges saw, the wonderful stone buildings and bewilderment that produced those remnants of a civilization that was evident in his report written in 1576.
Later John Lloyd Stephen also he narrates his discoveries and adventures in the work that later published "Incidents of Travel in Mexico, Yucatan and Central America." Other characters who collected and recounted his travels by the Honduran territory: Friar Esteban Verdalet, who is considered a martyr because he was killed at the hands of the Indians Tawahkas and Lencas.
Jesuit priest José Lino Fábregas he born in San Miguel de Tegucigalpa and who would conduct its studies at the University of Mexico and conducted extensive research on the Aztec civilization in that country, Fábregas was withdrawn of the brotherhood due to his works published for teaching in Italian “EZPLICAZIONES DELLE FIGURE HIEROFICHE DEL CODICE BORGIANO MESSICANO, DEDICATA AL ECCELESTISSIMO E REVERENDISSIMO PRINCIPEIL SIGNORE CARIDINALES BORGIA”.
The dedication of the Bishop of Honduras at that time Friar Jerónimo de Corella who with his conservative vision take the bishopric of Trujillo (Honduras) to Comayagua, followed by Bishop Fray Fernando Cardiñanos adventurer who traveled the territory and drafted several reports of censuses for the Spanish crown, so it was possible to give out a how places and parishes existed in Honduras, other of the informants exponents was Don Alejo Conde García who in 1790 he was the first to report the arrival of Galician settlers to Gracias a Dios, while he was Governor of Honduras.
In 1805 Colonel Ramón de Anguiano also reported on population census, the problems of the province and the attack at Trujillo by the British this came the idea of putting more defense in the Fort of Santa Barbara and send to build the Fortress of San Fernando the largest Spanish fortification in Central America; with the arrival of the Abbe Brasseur de Bourboug to the site of Copán in 1864, was impressed by the Mayan remains, also in a note of that year it appears as are and his companions the Mrs. Rob Owen and Osbert Salm taken pictures of the place. 1855 George Eprahim Squier published his notes on Honduras, in the work The States of Honduras and San Salvador. Squir, came to Honduras through the construction of Honduras National Railway. For 1857 the Spanish Antonio Calvache publishes a brochure about his explorations in Honduras.

Early tourism
in 1881 reached Copán the English archaeologist Alfred Percival Maudslay who makes the deepest studied of this Mayan site, then come other scientists, professionals and scholars who have participated in giving to the world, how is Honduras and many others in the US, Europe and Asia, were perplexed by the stories and details embodied in them, so they started the tourist "boom" to these lands. Another important factor was the arrival in the final decade of the 19th century and beginning of 20th century of the US transnational banana companies like Vaccaro Bros., the Standard Fruit Company, etc. who besides source work, several were the Americans who did so to speak tourism from that country to the Honduran north coast, thus forging a shipping tourist route.

First Honduran tourist route
Since the first decade of 20th century American tourist boats made the following route of the points considered most tourist highlight. With the increase in the presence of North American companies in Honduras, exoticism and beaches began to be attractive to Americans, with several moving to the Honduran coast for vacations.
Vapors ships departed from New Orleans, roamed the Gulf of Mexico, Tampico, port of Veracruz, around the Yucatan peninsula, arrived at the Honduras coast where their destinations were Puerto Cortés, Tela, La Ceiba and Trujillo, returning by Bay Islands, Caribbean Sea, go through the Havana in Cuba and return to the United States.

20th century
The increase in cruise trips made the Honduran coast a common destination for ships. Tourism in Honduras saw a huge increase in the 1970s and 1980s with the increase of American and European tourists. This prompted the creation of hotels in various Honduran cities. Another factor that helped increase tourism in Honduras was that it was quite cheap to stay in the country, given that the products were very cheap, in addition to the fact that Honduras already had a route tour.

Modern day
With the arrival of the new century, Honduras pointed to be a massive tourist attraction for nationals and foreigners. This was seen in the restoration of colonial historic centers, the increase in street remodeling, also with an increase in advertisements in order to increase the tourist flow in the country. Currently, Honduras is a tourist focus due mainly due to its beaches and mountains, although archaeological tourism has also gained some notoriety. Another attraction are the so-called tourist routes that one can follow.

Tourist diversity
Honduras is visited by visitors from around the world for several reasons, including the visit of its forests, islands and beaches by cruise ships, aircraft or road, being its main engines eco-tourism, cultural tourism and archaeological tourism.

Ecotourism
Honduras is an ideal place for eco tourism, has many forests, beaches, coral reefs and a variety of protected areas ideal for sightseeing. Honduras is  home to an estimated 8,000 plant species, about 250 reptiles and amphibians, more than 700 species of birds  and 110 species of mammals, distributed in different ecological regions of the country.
Honduras is very popular because of the beauty of the coral reefs in the Bay Islands, the Cochinos Cays and the beautiful beaches in Roatán. Another tourist destination is the Río Platano Biosphere, among other points of special interest

Gallery
Archaeological tourism
Always in the 19th century was when experts archaeologists, epigraphers and Mayanists they were dumped in to the rescue of the city of Copán is as the government of Honduras implement an economic program and cooperation with international organizations, universities and specialized museums with the sole purpose of preserving the archaeological site. In turn, placing it on the tourist map with other Mexican and Guatemalan Mayan cities, which were the first to be opened to the public. Honduras currently has museums exclusively with remains of the Mayan civilization.
There is a strong interest of the international community for archaeological sites like the city of Copán was built and occupied in a period where the Mayan culture had its most literal expression, ruled by a dynasty of 16 kings The Mayas of Copán built many temples, altars and steles in high and low relief, also has the ball park, is one of the most visited by tourists in Honduras.
Archeological sites:

Copán
Cuevas de Talgua
El puente
El rastrojón
El Curruste
Rio amarillo
Las sepulturas
Los Naranjos
Tenampúa
Yarumela

Gallery
Cultural tourism
Honduras possesses an invaluable cultural heritage, a mix between Spanish, Indigenous, and African traditions. Both in music, arts, dance, and popular culture. One of the most famous characteristics of Honduras in the music and dance of the Gafrifunas in the Caribbean dance that has become a symbol of Honduran identity. Another cultural characteristic of Honduras are the Holy Week carpets, a tradition of Spanish heritage.

Gallery
Museums
Honduras has a variety of museums, among which are the Villa Roy Republican History Museum, the Museum of the Honduran Man, the Museum of Anthropology and History, the Honduran Aviation Museum and Museum of National Identity (Honduras), among others.

Archeologcial museum of Comayagua
National Archives of Honduras
National Library of Honduras
Museum of the Casa Presidencial of Honduras,
Barracks San Francisco Military Museum,
Museum of Tegucigalpa cathedral
Museum of Banco Atlantida S.A.,
Museum of religious art
Mayan Sculpture museum
Museum of Central Bank of Honduras,
Pinacoteca of Central Bank of Honduras,
Tela Railroad Museum
Manuel Bonilla National Theatre,
Museum of Anthropology and History (Honduras),
Museum of National Identity (Honduras),
Museum of the Honduran Man,
Honduran Aviation Museum,

Gallery
Historical tourism
Since the 2000s the IHAH (Honduran Institute of Anthropology and History) has begun to improve the historic urban centers and various old buildings. The clearest example is the enormous restoration of historic buildings in colonial cities such as Comayagua.
Fortress of San Fernando, Omoa
Old presidential palace of Honduras, Tegucigalpa
Basilica of Suyapa, Tegucigalpa
St. Michael Archangel Metropolitan Cathedral, Tegugucigalpa
Inmaculate conception Cathedral, Comayagua
Caxa Real, Comayagua
Metropolitan Cathedral of San Pedro Sula, San pedro Sula
Fortress of Santa Bárbara, Trujillo
Fort San Cristóbal, Gracias

Coastal tourism
Honduras has several tourist spots on its coasts, including: 

Bay Islands
La Ceiba
Tela
Puerto Cortés
Amapala
Lake Yojoa
Omoa
Cochinos Cays
Trujillo

Gallery
Tourism to interior of the country
It also has places of interest to visit in the interior of Honduras, in the Honduran territory can be found in their municipalities, examples of the Baroque architecture of the Spanish colonization, churches that hold to the Christian tradition of making its temples in Latin cross, altarpieces, altars and images, evoke the colonial past.

Tegucigalpa and Comayagüela,
San Pedro Sula,
La Ceiba,
Comayagua,
Choluteca,
Tela,
Santa Rosa de Copán,
Siguatepeque,
Gracias,
Ojojona,
Catacamas,
Santa Bárbara,
La Esperanza,
Danlí,
Juticalpa,
Ocotepeque.

Sports tourism
Honduras is a country where sport is a daily element of daily life, the country has several stadiums and public sports facilities such as for football, basketball, baseball, tennis and swimming fields. The most popular sport at the national level is football, and Honduras has one of the best national leagues in CONCACAF, ranking 5th in the top 10 national leagues, its two most successful teams being Club Olimpia and Club Motagua. Their matches are the most watched nationally and the prices for the stadium entrance are accessible to both nationals and foreigners. 

In Honduras you can also practice extreme sports like the famous Rafting, being the most famous area where it is practiced in the Cangrejal river in La Ceiba. Another sport is jet ski racing, and Scuba Diving, being this one of the attractions of Honduras, you can dive and observe the coral reef as well as explore sunken ships

Climate
Another major attraction of Honduras is its tropical climate, has average temperatures above 18 degrees Celsius (64 degrees Fahrenheit) throughout the year, so it never frosts or no snowfall in the region, making it a paradise for tourists from countries of temperate zones.

In Honduras are two seasons, the rainy season between May and November and the dry season, between the months of December to April.
Due to its tropical climate it receives many visits of tourists from North America and Europe during winter between the months of December and March. Also it is visited by tourists from South America, Southern Africa and Australia in its winter months between June and September.

Security
The country has the tourism police of Honduras (policía de turismo de Honduras) responsible for protecting tourists, also provides security the National Police of Honduras, the main contact number is 911. Also the police often have cooperation with Honduras Army.

Places to go: Public Ministry of Honduras (Ministerio Público de Honduras), National Police of Honduras (Policía Nacional de Honduras), Honduran Red Cross (Cruz Roja Hondureña), Fire Department of Honduras (Cuerpo de Bomberos de Honduras).

Infrastructure
Honduras has an extensive hotel infrastructure in major cities, many 5 star hotels with swimming pools, cable TV, broadband internet, next to the beach.

Transport
Honduras has many means of transport to move nationwide, with several air routes connecting the country through its main airports, several international ports for receiving cruise ships and tourists. It also has broad highways that connect major cities and extensive network of roads connecting the other cities in the country and a railway system.

Aerial boom
It was after of World War I where it knew the benefits and versatilities of the aircraft and is as well as countries interested in forming an Air Force, also aeronautical engineers also viewed the ability to move people in such devices and so is designed that larger aircraft and in order to transport. In Honduras after the First Civil War of Honduras or “Revolución del 19” was the president in functions General Rafael López Gutiérrez who would be interested in buying aircraft for Armed Forces and turn that nationals obtain their title of airplane pilot, it happened that opened a flying school and sent to build airstrips, then the country and its main tourist cities had airports for transport of civilians, in the early 1930s opened the air mail and the trade routes, selling airline tickets in 1933 cost about 35 Lempiras.

Honduran railway
In the 20th century during the presidential administrations of the conservative Captain General José María Medina began with the works of National Railroad of Honduras, devised in the foreground both to unite the north coast to the south coast in the Gulf of Fonseca, but  this work because of mismanagement and actors lost credibility and it entangled in a tremendous debt, the lines that were installed not become the planned and the project was stalled, so the banana companies it benefited to transport their products to the Honduran major ports. After the 1920s the train intended for civilians started to carry a modest tourist clientele, but, until recently, that was in a difficult economic position. However, the national railway has managed to restore some machines that transit San Pedro Sula. The railway service in Honduras is seen as more of a tourist attraction than as a means of transport.

Pan-American Highway
The International or Pan American Highway crosses the country, before it was in the middle of 20th century when it were sent to build the major highways in Honduras, joining the villages to the cities.

Ministry of Tourism
The head of the Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Sports is responsible for ensuring the maintenance of tourism resources of the country, and to give the necessary attention and publicity in foreign countries, promoting and encouraging these resources in stands of international fairs of societies with greater economic acquisition. Similarly project to Honduran culture within social circles of the world, as national athletes who are the representatives of the distinctive and national colors in world sporting events.

See also
Secretariat of Foreign Affairs (Honduras)
Culture of Honduras
Visa policy of Honduras
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System

References
External links
 Honduras travel guide from Wikivoyage

## Culture of Honduras
The wealth of cultural expression in Honduras owes its origins primarily to being a part of Latin America but also to the multi-ethnic nature of the country. The population comprises 90% Mestizo, 7% Indigenous, 2% African descent, and 1% White. This influences all facets of the culture: customs, practices, ways of dressing, religion, rituals, codes of behavior and belief systems.

Popular culture
Popular culture in Honduras, as in most countries, is expressed not so much through sophisticated artistic creations, but rather by popular events that draw big crowds. In Honduras, such artistic and cultural events are held on specific days of the year and through special celebrations. Punta is a kind of dance and music the Hondurans proudly gather to do.
Hondurans celebrate national holidays and special events in the form of carnivals, fairs and parades throughout the year. For instance, in La Ceiba the annual carnival is a week-long celebration with music, exhibitions and special food, culminating in the most popular carnival in the country: "The Carnival of Friendship".
The Feria Juniana (June Fair) of San Pedro Sula includes musical concerts performed throughout the week, sporting events and exhibitions.
Puerto Cortés celebrates its fair in August with a "Venice" theme which includes parades of gondolas and other boats in the bay, and an evening fireworks display launched from boats.
Being a predominantly Catholic country, Honduras gives special attention to the celebrations of Holy Week. In some regions of the country, such as Comayagua, Choluteca, Copán and Intibucá, processions are held, especially during Thursday and Good Friday. Through these events, Hondurans commemorate the sacrifice Jesus Christ made for humanity by reenacting the events during the week between Palm Sunday and Jesus Christ crucifixion.

Probably the most outstanding event is the creation of the sawdust carpets. People will decorate the trail where Jesus will walk through (to his crucifixion) to make the walk less painful for Christ. Some people - particularly the inhabitants of the North and South Coast - use this week as an opportunity to visit beaches, rivers and swimming pools, to escape the stifling heat.
Hondurans celebrate Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve on 24 and 31 December respectively. During these celebrations, the majority of Honduran homes cook special dishes to mark the occasion. Favorites include tamales wrapped with banana leaves, roast pigs' legs, and pastries. All of these celebrations are complemented at the end of the night with fireworks and firecrackers.
Other celebrations of special interest to Hondurans include Mothers' Day, Children's Day, Labor Day, Teachers' Day and Friendship Day.

Ethnic cultures
The predominant ethnic group in Honduras are the mestizo - people of mixed native and European (mostly Spanish) descent. Mestizos account for over 84% of the population of Honduras. There are several other minority ethnic groups.  Amongst them are people who descend from native tribes that lived in the area before the Spanish arrived: Lencas, Chortís, Tolupanes, Pechs (also called Payas), Tawahkas, and Miskitos.
There is also a group called the Garífunas who descend from African slaves from the Caribbean islands.
According to the 2001 census the Amerindian population in Honduras included 381,495 people (6.3% of the total population). With the exception of the Lenca and the Ch'orti' they still keep their language.
Six different Amerindian groups were counted at the 2001 census:

the Lenca (279,507 in 2001;4.6% of the total population) living in the La Paz, Intibucá, and Lempira departments;
the Miskito (51,607 in 2001; 0.8%) living on the northeast coast along the border with Nicaragua.
the Ch'orti' (34,453 in 2001;0.6% of the total population), a Maya group living in the northwest on the border with Guatemala;
the Tolupan (also called Jicaque, "Xicaque", or Tol; 9,617 in 2001; 0.2% of the total population), living in the department of Yoro and in the reserve of the Montaña de la Flor and parts of the department of Yoro;
the Pech or Paya Indians (3,848 in 2001; 0.1% of the total population) living in a small area in the Olancho Department;
the Sumo or Tawahka (2,463 in 2001; <0.1%)

Lenca culture
The Lenca society forms the majority indigenous group, they gave resistance to the Spanish conquerors, who had to resort to various tactics and tricks to be able to subdue them. Chief Lempira, one of the Honduran heroes, was part of the Lencas tribe. His death at the hands of Rodrigo Ruiz, meant the final conquest of Honduran territory by the Spanish.
In the cultural part, the Lencas have lost their language and most of their religious practices, although they still practice peace pacts among themselves, as well as offerings to their ancestral gods, and some of them still retain their original way of dressing. Their food base comes from the sowing of basic grains, especially corn, from where they contributed culturally to Honduras the ‘Chicha’; in the artistic-economic plane the Lencas stand out for their pottery.

Garifuna culture
The Garífuna of Honduras come from the Lesser Antilles and more specifically from the island of San Vicente. From this place, the Garífunas were deported by the English in small boats, reaching the Bay Islands in 1797. This group of approximately 2000 Garífunas was later joined in the late 1800s and early 1900 by another considerable number of Garifuna immigrants with the purpose of alleviating the labor shortage in Honduras. Throughout its history, the Garífuna have settled on the Atlantic coast of Honduras, being the departments of Islas de la Bahía, Cortés, Atlántida and Colón where the largest number of Honduran Garífunas are concentrated.
This territory has allowed this group to depend on the marine resources provided by the northern coast of Honduras. Seafood, grains, fruits, and coastal legumes are part of the nutritional base of this ethnic group, among which are: Fish, bananas and yucca. From the latter they take the famous ‘casabe’, which is served almost daily in Garífuna households.
The Atlantic coast of Honduras also allows the Garífunas to preserve their Afro-Caribbean customs, among which are: Their Garífuna language, their religious system known as ‘Dugú’. Although today, the majority have come to accept the Catholic religion. The most important cultural contribution of the Honduran Garífuna in the world is the dance 'Punta' which reached high levels of popularity in the early 1900s after the musical success 'Sopa de Caracol', promoted by the group 'Banda Blanca' from Honduras. At the sporting level, the Garífuna have excelled greatly, particularly in soccer. Many have been the members of this ethnic group, who have been part of the Honduras soccer team.
As of 2019, the National Autonomous University of Honduras celebrates the Garífuna National Interuniversity Cultural, Artistic and Academic Encounter annually.

Famous Hondurans
Honduran Cardinal Óscar Andrés Rodríguez Maradiaga was a candidate to replace Pope John Paul II after his death in 2005 and Pope Benedict XVI after his retirement in 2013.

Salvador Moncada is a scientist of Honduran origin. He is married to Princess Marie-Esméralda of Belgium. His principal area of study is pharmacology, especially with respect to the effects of products of the metabolism of diverse acids, as well as the synthesis, action, and degradation of the biological mediator nitric oxide.

America Ferrera, an American actress, was born in Los Angeles to Honduran parents. Best known for the lead role in ABC's "Ugly Betty", she has also been successful on the big screen with her role in Real Women Have Curves. She has also won a Golden Globe Award and received recognition from the Screen Actors Guild. Juan Carlos Fanconi, is the most famous Honduran film director of the last decade, within his filmography he has collaborated with actors of Colombian, Argentine, and Mexican origin in many Honduran productions.
David Archuleta, finalist and runner-up of season 7 of "American Idol," and Jive Records artist, was born in Miami, Florida to a Honduran mother, Lupe, and an American father, Jeff. On September 17, 2009, he was awarded Male Music Rising Star at the 2009 ALMA Awards (American Latino Media Arts Awards). David performed "Contigo En La Distancia" on the show, receiving strong praise and recognition from critics and viewers alike. He has also won five Teen Choice Awards.
Neyda Sandoval and Satcha Pretto work with Univisión of the United States. Renán Almendárez Coello from Honduras is the morning man on radio station KLAX-FM of Los Angeles. He has been active in charity work, assisting the poor of Central America and Mexico.

Athletes
The most popular sport in Honduras is Association football. Among the most outstanding players are José Cardona who played for Atlético Madrid in Spain; Gilberto Yearwood who played in Elche, Spain; Porfirio Betancourt, who played in France, Spain, and the United States, Carlos Pavón, who currently plays for Real España; and David Suazo, who used to be a player of Internazionale, who was named The Most Valuable Foreign Player of the Italian league in 2006. 
Others footballers include Wilson Palacios in Stoke City of England, Maynor Figueroa in Hull City of England; Amado Guevara in Motagua, Honduras; and Carlo Costly in SC Vaslui of Romania.

Gallery

Musicians
Music in Honduras has flourished since pre-Hispanic periods, long before the colony, some of the autochthonous pre-Hispanic instruments are the following: Aerophones, Yaxchilan Mud Frog, Zampoñas, Quenas, Charangos, Drums. After colonization, new musical instruments were created: the snail, flutes, some percussion instruments and the Marimba. Within Creole or folk music we have the following: El Candú, El Pitero, Torito Pinto, Flores de Mimé, El Bananero.
Some notable Honduran musicians include Rafael Coello Ramos, Lidia Handal, Victoriano López, Jorge Santos, Norma Erazo, Sergio Suazo, Hector David, Angel Ríos, Jorge Mejia, Javier Reyes, Guillermo Anderson, Victor Donaire, Francisco Carranza, Camilo Rivera Guevara, Héctor David, Javier Monthiel and Moisés Canelo.
Escuela de Música Victoriano López in San Pedro Sula city.
At the international level the musical group Banda Blanca stood out, with their hits "Sopa De Caracol", "Do you Know Who Came?" and "Fiesta". Although the group produces merengueros rhythms, the Calypso and other Caribbean rhythms, their specialty is the Punta style, which they popularized during the 1990s.
Other musical groups include The Professionals, The Gran Banda, The Rolands, Angeles negros, Cafe Guancasco, and Atomic Rose.

Writers
The literature in the territory of present-day Honduras dates back more than 1,500 years ago, it was developed by the Mayan civilization in the city of Copán, the Mayan Script of our ancestors that used logograms and syllabic glyphs Mayan literature is preserved in the stelae, pyramids and temples at Copán. The city of Copán is home to the most informative pyramid in America, the Pyramid of Hieroglyphs that has more than 2,500 glyphs.
Among the most notable writers from Honduras are David Fortin, Froylán Turcios Juan Ramón Molina, Rafael Heliodoro Valle, Antonio José Rivas, Clementina Suárez, Ramón Amaya Amador, Marco Antonio Rosa, Roberto Sosa, Lucila Gamero de Medina, Roberto Quezada, Armando García, Helen Umaña, Alberto Destephen, Argentina Díaz Lozano, Rony Bonilla and Julio Escoto. Contemporary writers include Ernesto Bondy Reyes, Giovanni Rodríguez, Glenn Lardizábal, Bayardo de Campoluna, Venus Ixchel Mejía, Alex Darío Rivera, Azucena Ordoñez Rodas, among others.

Gallery

Arts and Media
The first printing press was brought to Honduras by General Francisco Morazán from Guatemala. He used it to begin publication in 1830 of The Gazette of the government. Bulletins and informative weekly papers soon followed.
In 1831, the newspaper known as The Beam was born, which had a short duration. At the end of the 19th century, The Chronicle commenced publication; next came The Newspaper of Honduras and The People (an official newspaper of the Honduran Liberal Party, which later ceased publication).

Honduras has a good number of newspapers and magazines, through which the Honduran people stay well informed. Of these the oldest is La Prensa, founded on October 26, 1964 in San Pedro Sula. El Tiempo was in publication from 1970 to 2015. In the capital city of Tegucigalpa, The Tribune and later The Herald appeared in the mid 1970s.With the Internet came Proceso Digital and the English weekly paper Honduras This Week. Recently sports magazines such as AS and Diez have appeared, with an emphasis on association football.
Television was introduced in Honduras in 1959 with the arrival of channel 5. Today there are various channels produced in Honduras.
With the arrival of the cable system, Hondurans have the opportunity to watch programs from round the world. The cultural impact of these programs remains to be seen.
Radio also has contributed to the cultural development of Honduras. Major players include Radio America and HRN, a member of the National System of Broadcasting Stations.

Theatre
Theatrical performances in Honduras date from the colonial period, they began in the 16th century, the first theatrical performance in Honduras was held in the year 1750, outdoors, in the city of Comayagua, the play represented was the Devil Cojuelo. In 1915 the Manuel Bonilla National Theater was founded. Theatrical training centers in Honduras are as follows:

National Theater School
La Fragua Theater Performing Arts Training Center (CC-ARTES) San Pedro Sula Art Department
National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH) Art Department
General Francisco Morazán National Pedagogical University (UPNGFM)
Bonsai Theater Group in Puerto Cortés (they filmed the first short film of the most important port in Central America)
José Francisco Saybe Theater - San Pedro Sula

Cinema
The first Honduran professional film director was Sami Kafati, he studied cinematography in Rome in the 1960s. His first cinematographic work was the experimental film Mi Amigo Ángel, produced in 1962 and is the first film in the cinematography of Honduras. 
Other national productions are "No Land Without Owner" (1984-1996), a fictional feature film by Sami Kafati. Currently, the playwrights Hispano Durón Gómez, Mario Jaén, among others, stand out.
Some of the films produced in Honduras more recently are the following:

"Anita, the insect hunter", produced by Hispano Durón,
"Amor y frijoles" by Guacamaya Films in 2009,
"Midnight Souls", (2001) by Juan Carlos Fanconi,
"The Strange Body", by José A. Olay,
"El Reyecito", by Fosi Bendeck,
"High Risk", by René Pauck,
"Voice of Angel", by Francisco Andino,
"Side", by Esau Adonai,
"The Last Kidnapping", by José A. Olay, starring Marianela Ibarra, Nelyi Larice, Glen Lopez, Mario Sarmientos
"Nos Vale Verga" by Regina Águila.
"Unos Pocos con Valor" (The Birds of Bethlehem) by Mario Berrios, Produced by Ismael Bevilacqua, directed by Douglas Martin (2010)
"Who pays the bill" by Guacamaya Films (2013) with the performance of Jorge Flores, Nelyi Larice, Ozcar Izacas, Sandra Ochoa, Maritza Perdomo, Anuar Vindel
"El Xendra" by Juan Carlo Fanconi (2012)
"A place in the Caribbean" by Juan Carlo Fanconi (2017)
Honduran cinema has had a boom in the last decade, the growth of filmmakers and the support by institutions and private companies for competitions has motivated young students of communications-related careers to create their own short films, documentary shorts and documentaries. The Icaro Festival is the most important international film festival in Central America and the Caribbean.

Cuisine
Honduras has a variety of traditional dishes: The baleada is one of the most representative dishes of Honduran Gastronomy. It is basically composed; for a flour tortilla, which is folded and filled with fried beans, dry cheese and cream butter. Others add to it; roast meat or scrambled eggs to taste, sometimes avocado or chorizo is also added but with any of these ingredients it is very delicious. In addition to the baleadas, they are also popular: Roast beef with chimol, chicken in corn rice, fried fish with pickled onion, and the typical Garífuna dish that is fish fried in coconut oil. 

There is another very popular food called macheteada, which is a sugary flour dough frying with three slits, hence its name macheteados. The slices with meat or chicken are also very popular in Honduras and chicken with slices is better known as chicken chuco by Hondurans and is sold in many corners as well as the baleadas and people make them homemade and sell them and usually they It goes very well.

Other dishes are montucas, enchiladas, corn nacatamales, "tripe" or tripe soup and an abundant selection of tropical fruits such as: mango, papaya, pineapple, plum, sapotes and passion fruit (maracuyá). Grilled meat, pork and chicken chops are also frequently prepared with tortillas, red beans, rice and, of course, fried plantains.
In coastal areas and in the Bay Islands, seafood is prepared in various ways and some dishes are prepared with coconut. The tourist areas have restaurants with international cuisine and American-style dishes.

Religion
Honduras enjoys freedom of worship. Hondurans are predominantly Christians with half of the country being Catholic and has an increasing number of its population practicing different forms of  evangelicalism. Before the conquest of Honduras in the national territory, each ethnic group had its own religion and its own gods, they were polytheistic and animistic religions, among them the Mayan Religion stands out, as well as the Chorotega Religion, the Lenca Religion and the Pech Religion.During colonial times, Christianity and some African religions such as the Garífuna Dugú religion were introduced to Honduras, which is a mixture of African, Christian (Catholic) and indigenous beliefs. Honduras was the country where the second Catholic Mass was celebrated in continental America. This was held on August 14, 1502, in Punta Caxinas, two weeks after the discovery of Honduras by Christopher Columbus. Since then, the Spanish were in charge of instilling the Christian faith among the natives of Honduras.
After the independence of Honduras in 1821 and in the first constitution of the country promulgated on December 11, 1825, Honduras is declared a secular state, this supposes the null interference of any organization or religious confession in the government of the same, either in the executive, the legislative or the judicial.
In recent years, both the Catholic Church and Protestant churches have experienced significant growth in terms of the number of committed parishioners and communicate with the new mass media, have television channels, radio stations, newspapers, schools, colleges, universities and Internet pages.

In addition to these religions, there are smaller-scale groups in Honduras that profess other religions, such as: Islam, Judaism, and members of the Rastafari movement among others.
Today a low percentage of the population is considered atheist, another low percentage of Hondurans consider themselves agnostic, 50% of the believers are Catholic and an important part of the autochthonous ethnic groups conserve their original religion.
Tribal and Indigenous Culture and Struggles within Honduras

There are several different tribes located in the country of Honduras known as the Lenca, Miskitu, Tawahka, Pech, Maya Chortis, Xicaques, and many more. Each tribe has its own history, cultural traditions, and livelihood within Honduras. These indigenous people fight environmental justice-related issues daily throughout their lives. Many indigenous people face the risk of eventually being forced to change their culture and historical practices within their own land to adopt the new modern-day culture of Honduras. Hence, there is growing popularity in the belief that indigenous people stand in the way of the country’s national development. 
The Lenca tribe, for example, is one of the largest in the country and has a population of around 100,000 and around 612 different Lenca communities. The majority of these communities are located in areas that are home to rough, mountainous terrain and are extremely difficult to reach. For those living in said conditions, essential daily tasks can be hard to complete in some locations as there is no roadway, running water, or even transportation. The Lenca tribe was unable to keep their language strong despite being somewhat isolated from the rest of the country. Income is made from selling coffee, weaving, and pottery; with their location, not a lot of money is made each day. The Lenca people have a true connection with the rivers, land, and nature. Non-indigenous people of Honduras pushed the Lenca people to live in the mountains, causing a lot of resistance between the two groups.   
Along with the remote living conditions, hydroelectric facilities and mining are becoming popular in Lenca’s territory. The Lenca are ready to fight, even if it means losing their lives and some already have. Young Lenca people face challenges such as finding employment as there is little way of making a consistent income within most locations that the Lenca tribe inhabits. Instead, they must leave and likely will find themselves working in the military. The Lenca tribe is striving to find any possible solution to these problems and wants young Lenca people to be able to stay within their communities. There are major injustices occurring within the Lenca’s people and land. With these injustices, a complex multitude of issues arise. These problems all tie together and include isolation, unemployment, loss of aspects of their culture such as their own native language and land, and mining/other environmental hazards. 
Hydroelectric, dams, and mining are all becoming very common in Honduras and tend to be located on tribal or indigenous lands. For instance, a damn was set to be constructed on the Gualcarque River. This river happened to be a very important and culturally significant river to the Lenca people and anyone surrounding that area. This dam’s main purpose would be to fuel hydroelectricity and mining for gold, silver, iron, and other valuable materials. A law was passed known generally as the “2013 mining law” that allowed open-pit mines and the use of harmful substances such as cyanide which is a threat to both the environment and human health. The law also required that the inhabitants of the land approve of the mining operations. However, the law often backfires and violent threats are used frequently as tactics to gain approval for the new construction of a mine or dam. Resistance often occurs with the Lenca tribe combined with other groups however it can become very dangerous even if the resistance is represented by means of a peaceful protest. The Honduran government has been present at these peaceful protests and often, violence such as shootings and other dangerous acts are at risk for breaking out. 
In 2009, the Honduran government underwent a military coup d'état. During this event, mass corruption occurred and individuals from marginalized groups such as those from Lenca and Garifuna tribes were restored to the streets. It has been an uphill battle for all in this position since then. Honduras still remains in a coup-like atmosphere with electoral frauds, increased deaths, a large migration of its people, activists being arrested and killed, and so on. Honduras has one of the highest murder rates of activists and these people face a massive amount of danger each day. The organization known as the Civil Council of Popular and Indigenous Organizations of Honduras (COPINH) plays a great role in activism towards these issues that the Lenca tribe and others face. Members of the COPINH group, such as Thomas Garcia, have been shot and killed during these protests against building dams and mining. The Miskitu tribe sums up around 5% of the indigenous population within the country of Honduras and is very large.  
Similar to the Lenca tribe, these people are often marginalized and do not have proper access to healthcare, or educational opportunities. Miskitu people are extremely hard workers which can cause them many health problems. In addition, agriculture, being part of nature and the land is a major part of their traditions and ways of living. These people often face problems that arise from the Honduran government forcing them from their land, thus making them cut ties with the agricultural roots and values of their own land. Over a period of many years, tropical rainforests along the Caribbean coast, home to much of the Miskitu tribe as well as others, have been experiencing issues with groups such as miners, ranchers, and other illegal groups and people wrongfully utilizing the tribal land. As of 2009, the Honduras government has finally handed over a large chunk of land to the Miskitu people however, a major plan to construct a dam known as the Patuca 3 hydroelectric project was funded in the main cultural lands of the Miskitu and other tribes. As soon as this land was handed over, the government also began pestering these tribes about potential gas and oil uses within the land. 
There are 41+ dam constructions which are all occurring in an area of tribal land. There have been several meetings between the tribes including the Tulupanes, Pech, Miskito, Maya-Chortis, Lenca, and Garifuna. The government of Honduras continues to jeopardize these tribal communities and utilize rivers that hold a huge link to the tribe's traditions, culture, and roots. With such resistance between indigenous peoples and the government, there is a popular belief that indigenous people are against any further development of their land. When, in reality, indigenous people are open to changes and modifications within their land if the choice is made by their own people. This strong willed-attitude and belief are held as if the changes to the land occur as a decision made within the tribe then they will not lose connection with the land and can continue on with their way of life. All members of the tribes are ready to fight for the rights and title of their land if the construction of dams becomes an official plan.  
Despite many tribes such as Garifuna having a long history with their land and their presence in Honduras, their and other tribes' lands are sometimes deemed to be practically non-existent. Not only is their land within Honduras also experiencing issues with the construction of dams and or mining locations but also with recent tourism that is steadily increasing. With tourism becoming popular, the Garifuna face an increased risk of losing their land, as do many other tribes of Honduras. Some are promised employment within this new wave of tourism however, their culture is also becoming more visible to others, making it not as sacred. In addition, because of this increase in tourism, new developers have begun stomping the lands of the Garifuna and constructing upon their land (large resorts for tourists, etc), taking their land, and ripping their culture away from them. There are massive conflicts over the land being utilized in this way. 
In recent years, indigenous tribe members are still experiencing discrimination and a true lack of human rights toward their culture, land, and people. In 2016, 600+ activists gathered in the capital of Honduras known as Tegucigalpa. The event was known as the Summit for Indigenous and Peasant Communities in the Struggle Against Extractivism and was hosted by the Platform of Social and Popular Movement of Honduras. Struggles were shared by each tribe such as the problem of logging within the Tolupane tribes' land, extreme dam construction, and mining faced by the Lenca, members of the Garifuna tribe facing increased tourism and drilling within their lands, and so on. The groups combined in an effort to support one another and design resistance strategies together. Extraction methods are increasing rapidly and are often targeted to occur within indigenous people’s land instead of other prime locations. Activists are rising to promote these issues and improvements are being made but it will take a great deal of time to see them.

See also
Public holidays in Honduras
Virgin of Suyapa, perhaps Honduras' most popular religious image
Lluvia de Peces, rain of fish phenomenon
La Ceiba Carnival
Miss Honduras
Human rights in Honduras
 Honduras portal


== References ==

## Cuisine of Honduras
Honduran cuisine is a fusion of Mesoamerican, Spanish, Caribbean and African cuisines. Coconut and coconut milk are featured in both sweet and savory dishes. Regional specialties include sopa de caracol, fried fish, tamales, carne asada and baleadas. Other commonly served dishes include meat roasted with chismol and carne asada, chicken with rice and corn, and fried fish with pickled onions and jalapeños. In the coastal areas and the Bay Islands, seafood and some meats are prepared in many ways, including with coconut milk.
Among the soups the Hondurans prepare and eat often are bean soup, mondongo soup (tripe soup), seafood soups, and beef soups. Generally all of these soups are mixed with plantains, yuca, and cabbage, and served with corn tortillas.

Other typical dishes are montucas or corn tamales, stuffed tortillas, and tamales wrapped in plantain leaves. Typical Honduran dishes also include a wide variety of tropical fruits such as papaya, pineapple, plum, sapote, passion fruit, and bananas, which are prepared in many ways while they are still green.
Common beverages served with dinner or lunch include soft drinks, agua de nance and horchata. A well-known domestic bottled soft drink is banana-flavored Tropical Banana.

History
Precolumbian cuisine
The gastronomy of Honduras before the conquest was based on the consumption of grains such as corn, beans, and cocoa, and crops such as pumpkins, chili peppers, tomatoes, and several types of squash. Pre-Hispanic peoples also consumed the meat of the guajolote, fish, and some mammals like deers as well as other products like honey and various fruits such as pineapples and papaya for the preparation of various desserts and drinks.

Colonial fusion
This would be the basis of the Honduran diet that would be mixed with Spanish cuisine, which brought with it the consumption of beef, sausage, oils, and wheat. The Iberian diet in Honduras gave a total change in the eating habits of the pre-Hispanic peoples, with the introduction of dairy products being the biggest change of these, from which the diverse type of cheeses and Honduran dishes that they carry in their recipes were derived.

Modern Honduran cuisine
Over the centuries, other ingredients have been contributed to the gastronomy of Honduras, such as African and foreign influences as well as international dishes thanks to the migration of various human groups to Honduras following the liberal reform.

Breakfast
Hondurans usually have a large, hearty breakfast. It typically consists of fried eggs (whole or scrambled), refried beans, Honduran salty sour cream (crema), queso fresco, avocado, sweet fried plantains, and tortillas. It is common for most households to first prepare tortillas, a staple for nearly every dish, which are used throughout the rest of the day.
Other breakfast favorites include carne asada (roasted meat) and Honduran spicy sausages (chorizo). A good breakfast will be accompanied with hot, dark—in this case Honduran-grown—coffee. Honduran coffee is renowned for its delicate qualities, being grown on the slopes of the Honduran mountains in rich soils of volcanic origin. A specific brand famous for its flavor comes from the Honduran region of Marcala; others are the Copán coffee and the coffee grown in Ocotepeque.
Street vendors often sell breakfast baleadas made of flour tortillas, refried beans, and crema or queso fresco. Additional toppings include eggs, meat, and even pickled onions. Vendors sell small tamales made of sweet yellow corn dough, called tamalitos de elote, eaten with sour cream; fresh horchata and pozole is also common.
Another food that can be eaten for breakfast as a dessert is rosquillas. Rosquillas can be considered as a Honduran doughnut and are made from corn (masa, cheese and yeast).

Sopa de caracol
Sopa de caracol (conch soup) is one of the most representative dishes of the Honduran cuisine. This soup was made famous throughout Latin America because of a catchy song from Banda Blanca called "Sopa de Caracol." The conch is cooked in coconut milk and the conch's broth, with spices, yuca (cassava), cilantro, and green bananas known as guineo verde. Other varieties including crab, fish or shrimp are known as sopa marinera.

Sopa de frijoles
This traditional soup is made by boiling black or red beans with garlic in water until soft. Once they are soft, the beans are blended, and added to a pot filled with water and with pork bones to serve as the base of the soup. Once the soup base has taken a chocolate color and has been boiled enough, the bones are removed, and water is added to the pot, along with the rest of the ingredients, which may include yuca, green plantains, eggs, and many other ingredients. The soup is served with rice and tortillas, and may be accompanied by sour cream, smoked dry cheese, avocados, and lemons.

Carneada
Carneada is considered one of Honduras' national dishes, known as plato típico when served in Honduran restaurants. While it is a type of dish, a carneada or carne asada, like its Mexican counterpart, is usually more of a social event with drinks and music centered on a feast of barbecued meat. The cuts of beef are usually marinated in sour orange juice, salt, pepper and spices, and then grilled.
The meat is usually accompanied by chismol salsa (made of chopped tomatoes, onion and cilantro with lemon and spices), roasted plátanos (sweet plantains), spicy chorizos, olanchano cheese, tortillas, and refried mashed beans.

Rice and beans
Rice and beans is a popular side dish in the Honduran Caribbean coast. It is often called casamiento as in El Salvador. The most common beans used in Honduras are red beans (frijoles cheles). Typically in Honduras beans are refried and served with green fried bananas (tajadas).

Fried Yojoa fish
Fried Yojoa fish often has a more savory flavor compared to other types of fish served in the region. Yojoa fish is salted, spiced, and later deep-fried. It is frequently served with pickled red cabbage, pickled onions, and deep-fried sliced plantains (tajaditas).

Baleada
The baleada is one of the most common street foods in Honduras. The basic style is a flour tortilla, folded and filled with refried beans and queso fresco or sour cream (crema). Roasted meat, avocado, plantains or scrambled eggs may be added. Honduran fast-food chains serve different kinds of baleadas.

Corn tortillas
Corn, or maíz, is a staple in Honduran cuisine. Eating corn comes to Hondurans as an inheritance from the Maya-Lenca people; the Maya believed corn to be sacred, and that the father gods created men from it.
Some tortilla-based dishes include tacos fritos, in which tortillas are filled in with ground meat or chicken and rolled into a flute. The rolled tacos are then deep-fried and served with raw cabbage, hot tomato sauce, cheese and sour cream as toppings.
Catrachitas are a common simple snack, made of deep-fried tortilla chips covered with mashed refried beans and cheese. Chilindrinas, deep-fried tortilla strips with hot tomato sauce and cheese, are a variant of this snack. It is common in Honduran restaurants to serve an anafre, a clay pot with melting cheese or sour cream, mashed beans and sometimes chopped chorizo heated on top of a clay container with burning charcoal, with fried tortilla chips for dipping.
Enchiladas: the whole tortilla is deep-fried and served with a variety of toppings. Ground pork is first to be placed on the tortilla, followed by raw chopped cabbage or lettuce, hot tomato sauce, and a slice of boiled egg.
Tortilla con quesillo: two tortillas with quesillo (a lightly salted cheese that can easily melt), in between and then pan-fried; served with a tomato sauce. Mashed beans are sometimes also added as a filling with the cheese. Chismol is sometimes on top.

Condiments
Encurtido is used as an appetizer, side dish and condiment, and is a common dish in Honduran cuisine.

Tegucigalpan cuisine
This refers to the cuisine and restaurants of the city of Tegucigalpa, Honduras. Rice, beans, and tortillas are a staple of the Honduran diet, and some would argue there is little difference in quality between the streetside vendors and top restaurants.
The city, like in most other places in Honduras, offers a wide variety of cuisines from not only Honduras but also Asia, India, the Middle East, and other regions. Tegucigalpa offers everything from street food to gourmet food in five-star restaurants. However, according to Frommer's, "Tegucigalpa's dining scene is considerably more varied when compared to the rest of the country, but lacks the quality and depth of other Latin American cities."

See also
Food portal
 Honduras portal

References
External links
 Media related to Cuisine of Honduras at Wikimedia Commons

## List of museums in Honduras
This is a list of museums in Honduras.

List
National Gallery of Art
Honduran Aviation Museum
Museo Arqueologico de Comayagua
Museo de Antropología e Historia de San Pedro Sula
Museo de la Fortaleza de San Fernando de Omoa
Museo de la Identidad Nacional
Museo de la Naturaleza (Honduras)
Museo de las mariposas (Honduras)
Museo de las telecomunicaciones (Honduras)
Museo de los Naranjos
Museo de los Palacios
Museo de Trujillo
Museo del Hombre Hondureño
Museo Numismatico "Rigoberto Borjas"
Museo Pequeño Sula para la Infancia
Museo Santa María de los Angeles
Parque Arqueológico Cuevas de Talgua

External links
Listado de museos (Archived September 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine)

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- San Pedro Sula
- Roatán
- Tela
- La Ceiba
- Cozumel

## Famous Museums
- Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Tegucigalpa (MACT)
- Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto Cortés (MACPC)
- Museo del Oro de Honduras (MOL)
- Museo Nacional de Honduras (MNH)
- Museo de la Naturaleza de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras (MUNAH)

## Local Desserts
- Pan de Ques
- Pan de Caña
- Pan de Plátano
- Pan de Coco
- Pan de Maíz


==================================================
## 📖 Wikipedia Information — Honduras
SOURCE_URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honduras
==================================================

## Summary
Honduras, officially the Republic of Honduras, is a country in Central America. It is bordered to the west by Guatemala, to the southwest by El Salvador, to the southeast by Nicaragua, to the south by the Pacific Ocean at the Gulf of Fonseca, and to the north by the Gulf of Honduras, a large inlet of the Caribbean Sea. Its capital and largest city is Tegucigalpa.
Honduras was home to several important Mesoamerican cultures, most notably the Maya, before Spanish colonization in the 16th century. The Spanish introduced Catholicism and the Spanish language, along with numerous customs that have blended with the indigenous culture. Honduras became independent in 1821 and has since been a republic, although it has consistently endured much social strife and political instability, and remains one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere. In 1960, the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice.
The economy is primarily agricultural, making it vulnerable to natural disasters such as Hurricane Mitch in 1998. Honduras has a Human Development Index of 0.624, ranking 138th in the world. In 2022, according to the National Institute of Statistics of Honduras, 73% of the country's population lived in poverty, and 53% lived in extreme poverty. The lower class is primarily agriculturally based while wealth is concentrated in the urban centers. The country is one of the most economically unequal in Latin America. Honduran society is predominantly Mestizo; however, there are also significant Indigenous, Black, and White communities.
In the early 20th century, Honduras was dominated by transnational agricultural companies, whose interests were protected militarily by the United States. The term "banana republic" was originally coined to describe Honduras's politically unstable, corporate-dominated democracy. The civilian government was overthrown in a 1963 military coup, and the nation returned to civilian rule in 1979. The United States re-established its military presence in Honduras in the 1980s, using Honduras as a base of operations to oppose the Nicaraguan government in the Contra war.
A 2009 military coup toppled the government of Manuel Zelaya, and controversy arose from claims of electoral fraud in the subsequent 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. In 2021 Xiomara Castro was elected to the presidency, returning the left to power for the first time since the 2009 coup. Nasry Asfura won the 2025 election amid claims of fraud and electoral interference by the United States.
Honduras spans about 112,492 km2 (43,433 sq mi) and has a population exceeding 10 million. Its northern portions are part of the western Caribbean zone, as reflected in the area's demographics and culture. Honduras is known for its rich natural resources, including minerals, coffee, tropical fruit, and sugar cane, as well as for its growing textiles industry, which serves the international market.

## Etymology
The literal meaning of the Spanish term honduras is 'depths'. The name could refer either to the bay of Trujillo as an anchorage, fondura in the Leonese dialect of Spain, or to Christopher Columbus's alleged quote that "Gracias a Dios que hemos salido de esas honduras" ("Thank God we have departed from those depths").
It was not until the end of the 16th century that Honduras was used for the whole province. Prior to 1580, Honduras referred to only the eastern part of the province, and Higueras referred to the western part. Another early name is Guaymuras, revived as the name for the political dialogue in 2009 that took place in Honduras as opposed to Costa Rica.
Hondurans are often referred to as either the masculine catracho or the feminine catracha in Spanish.

## Pre-colonial period
In the pre-Columbian era, the territory was split between two pan-cultural regions: Mesoamerica in the west and the Isthmo-Colombian area in the east. Each complex had a "core area" within Honduras (the Sula Valley for Mesoamerica, and La Mosquitia for the Isthmo-Colombian area), and the intervening area was one of gradual transition. However, these concepts had no meaning in the Pre-Columbian era and represent diverse areas. The Lenca people of the interior highlands are also generally considered to be culturally Mesoamerican, though the extent of linkage with other areas varied over time (for example, expanding during the zenith of the Toltec Empire).
In the extreme west, Maya civilization flourished for hundreds of years. The dominant, best known, and best studied state was in Copán, which was located in a mainly non-Maya area, or on the frontier between Maya and non-Maya areas. Copán declined with other Lowland centres during the conflagrations of the Terminal Classic in the 9th century. The Maya of this civilization survive in western Honduras as the Ch'orti', isolated from their Choltian linguistic peers to the west.
However, Copán represents only a fraction of the pre-Columbian history, with remnants of other civilizations throughout the country. Archaeologists have studied sites such as Naco and La Sierra in the Naco Valley, Los Naranjos on Lake Yojoa, Yarumela in the Comayagua Valley, La Ceiba and Salitron Viejo (both now under the Cajón Dam reservoir), Selin Farm and Cuyamel in the Aguan valley, Cerro Palenque, Travesia, Curruste, Ticamaya, Despoloncal, and Playa de los Muertos in the lower Ulúa River valley, and many others.
In 2012, LiDAR scanning revealed that several previously unknown high density settlements existed in La Mosquitia, corresponding to the legend of "La Ciudad Blanca". Excavation and study has since improved knowledge of the region's history. It is estimated that these settlements reached their zenith from 500 to 1000 AD.

## Spanish conquest (1524–1539)
On his fourth and the final voyage to the New World in 1502, Columbus landed near the modern town of Trujillo, near Guaimoreto Lagoon, becoming the first European to visit the Bay Islands. On 30 July 1502, Columbus sent his brother Bartholomew to explore the islands, and Bartholomew encountered a Mayan trading vessel from Yucatán, carrying well-dressed Maya and a rich cargo. Bartholomew's men stole the cargo and kidnapped the ship's elderly captain to serve as an interpreter in the first recorded encounter between the Spanish and the Maya.
In March 1524, Gil González Dávila became the first Spaniard to enter Honduras as a conquistador. followed by Hernán Cortés, who had brought forces down from Mexico. Much of the conquest took place in the following two decades, first by groups loyal to Cristóbal de Olid, and then by those loyal to Francisco de Montejo but most particularly by those following Alvarado. In addition to Spanish resources, the conquerors relied heavily on armed forces from Mexico – Tlaxcalans and Mexica armies of thousands who remained garrisoned in the region.
Resistance to conquest was led in particular by Lempira. Many regions in the north of Honduras never fell to the Spanish, notably the Miskito Kingdom. After the Spanish conquest, Honduras became part of Spain's vast empire in the New World within the Kingdom of Guatemala. Trujillo and Gracias were the first city-capitals. The Spanish ruled the region for approximately three centuries.

## Spanish Honduras (1524–1821)
Honduras was organized as a province of the Kingdom of Guatemala, and the capital was first at Trujillo on the Atlantic coast and later at Comayagua, and finally at Tegucigalpa in the central part of the country.
Silver mining was a key factor in the Spanish conquest and settlement of Honduras. Initially the mines were worked by local people through the encomienda system, but as disease and resistance made this option less available, slaves from other parts of Central America were brought in. When local slave trading stopped at the end of the 16th century, African slaves, mostly from Angola, were imported. After about 1650, very few slaves or other outside workers arrived in Honduras.
Although the Spanish conquered the southern or Pacific portion of Honduras fairly quickly, they were less successful on the northern (Atlantic) side. They managed to found a few towns along the coast—at Puerto Caballos and Trujillo in particular—but failed to conquer the eastern portion of the region and many pockets of independent indigenous people as well. The Miskito Kingdom in the northeast was particularly effective at resisting conquest, which found support from northern European privateers, pirates and especially the British formerly English colony of Jamaica, which placed much of the area under its protection after 1740.

## Independence (1821)
Honduras gained independence from Spain in 1821 and was a part of the First Mexican Empire until 1823, when it became part of the United Provinces of Central America. It has been an independent republic and has held regular elections since 1838. In the 1840s and 1850s Honduras participated in several failed attempts at Central American unity, such as the Confederation of Central America (1842–1845), the covenant of Guatemala (1842), the Diet of Sonsonate (1846), the Diet of Nacaome (1847) and National Representation in Central America (1849–1852). Although Honduras eventually adopted the name Republic of Honduras, the unionist ideal never waned, and Honduras was one of the Central American countries that pushed hardest for a policy of regional unity.
Policies favoring international trade and investment began in the 1870s. Foreign interests became involved, first in shipping from the north coast, especially tropical fruit and most notably bananas, and then in building railroads. Comayagua was the capital until 1880, when the capital moved to Tegucigalpa. In 1888, a projected railroad line from the Caribbean coast to Tegucigalpa ran out of money when it reached San Pedro Sula. As a result, San Pedro grew into the nation's primary industrial center and second-largest city. Since independence, nearly 300 small internal rebellions and civil wars have occurred, including some changes of régime.

## 20th century and the role of American companies
In the late 19th century, Honduras granted land and substantial exemptions to several US-based fruit and infrastructure companies in return for developing the country's northern regions. Thousands of workers came to the north coast as a result to work in banana plantations and other businesses that grew up around the export industry. Banana-exporting companies, dominated until 1930 by the Cuyamel Fruit Company, as well as the United Fruit Company, and Standard Fruit Company, built an enclave economy in northern Honduras, controlling infrastructure and creating self-sufficient, tax-exempt sectors that contributed relatively little to economic growth. American troops landed in Honduras in 1903, 1907, 1911, 1912, 1919, 1924 and 1925.
American writer O. Henry coined the term "banana republic" in his 1904 novel Cabbages and Kings to describe a fictional country, Anchuria, that was inspired by his experiences in Honduras, where he had lived for six months. In The Admiral, one of the interlinking stories from which he composed the novel, O. Henry refers to Anchuria as a "small maritime banana republic"; naturally, the fruit was the entire basis of its economy. According to a literary analyst writing for The Economist, "his phrase neatly conjures up the image of a tropical, agrarian country. But its real meaning is sharper: it refers to the fruit companies from the United States that came to exert extraordinary influence over the politics of Honduras and its neighbors." In addition to drawing Central American workers north, the fruit companies encouraged immigration of workers from the English-speaking Caribbean, notably Jamaica and Belize, which introduced an African-descended, English-speaking and largely Protestant population into the country, although many of these workers left following changes to immigration law in 1939.
Constitutional crises in the 1940s led to reforms in the 1950s. One reform gave workers permission to organize, and a 1954 general strike paralyzed the northern part of the country for more than two months, but led to reforms. A 1963 military coup unseated democratically elected President Ramón Villeda Morales. In 1960, the northern part of what was the Mosquito Coast was transferred from Nicaragua to Honduras by the International Court of Justice.

## War and upheaval (1969–1999)
In 1969, Honduras and El Salvador fought what became known as the Football War. Border tensions led to acrimony between the two countries after Honduran President Oswaldo López Arellano blamed the deteriorating economy on immigrants from El Salvador. The relationship reached a low when El Salvador met Honduras for a three-round football elimination match preliminary to the World Cup. On 14 July the Salvadoran army invaded Honduras. The Organization of American States negotiated a cease-fire which took effect on 20 July and brought about a withdrawal of Salvadoran troops in early August. Contributing factors to the conflict were a boundary dispute and the presence of thousands of Salvadorans living in Honduras illegally. After the week-long war, as many as 130,000 Salvadoran immigrants were expelled.

Hurricane Fifi caused severe damage when it skimmed the northern coast on 18 and 19 September 1974. Following Fifi, Presidents Melgar Castro and Policarpo Paz García largely built the current physical infrastructure and telecommunications system of Honduras. In 1979, the country returned to civilian rule. A constituent assembly was popularly elected in April 1980 to write a new constitution, and general elections were held in November 1981. The constitution was approved in 1982 and the PLH government of Roberto Suazo won the election with a promise to carry out an ambitious program of economic and social development to tackle an economic recession. He launched ambitious social and economic development projects sponsored by American development aid. Honduras became host to the largest Peace Corps mission in the world, and nongovernmental and international voluntary agencies proliferated. The Peace Corps withdrew its volunteers in 2012, citing safety concerns.
During the early 1980s, the United States established a continuing military presence in Honduras to support El Salvador, the Contra guerrillas fighting the Nicaraguan government, and also develop an airstrip and modern port in Honduras. Though spared the bloody civil wars wracking its neighbors, the Honduran Army quietly waged campaigns against Marxist–Leninist militias such as the Cinchoneros Popular Liberation Movement, notorious for kidnappings and bombings, and against many non-militants. The operation included a campaign of extrajudicial killings by government units, most notably the CIA-trained Battalion 316. Honduras was found internationally liable for a series of enforced disappearances during this time period, culminating in Velásquez Rodríguez v. Honduras.
In 1998, Hurricane Mitch caused massive and widespread destruction. President Carlos Roberto Flores said that 50 years of progress in the country had been reversed. Mitch destroyed about 70% of the crops and an estimated 70–80% of the transportation infrastructure, including nearly all bridges and secondary roads. Across Honduras 33,000 houses were destroyed, and an additional 50,000 damaged. Some 5,000 people killed, and 12,000 more injured. Total losses were estimated at US$3 billion.

## 21st century
In 2007, President Manuel Zelaya and President of the United States George W. Bush began talks on US assistance to Honduras to tackle the growing drug cartels in the Mosquito Coast region using US special forces. This marked the beginning of a new foothold for the US military's continued presence in Central America.

Under Zelaya, Honduras joined ALBA in 2008 but withdrew in 2010 after the 2009 Honduran coup d'état. In 2009 a constitutional crisis resulted when power was transferred in a coup from the president to the head of Congress. The OAS suspended Honduras because it did not regard its government as legitimate. Countries around the world, the OAS, and the United Nations formally and unanimously condemned the action as a coup d'état, refusing to recognize the de facto government, even though the lawyers consulted by the Library of Congress submitted to the United States Congress an opinion that declared the coup legal. The Honduran Supreme Court also ruled that the proceedings had been legal. The government that followed the de facto government established a truth and reconciliation commission, Comisión de la Verdad y Reconciliación, which after more than a year of research and debate concluded that the ousting had been a coup d'état and therefore illegal in the commission's opinion.
President Juan Orlando Hernández took office in 2014. After managing to stand for a second term, a very close election in 2017 left uncertainty as to whether Hernandez or his main challenger, television personality Salvador Nasralla, had prevailed. The disputed election caused protests and violence. Hernández was declared the winner of the election after a partial recount. 
The former first lady Xiomara Castro, leftist presidential candidate of opposition Liberty and Refoundation Party, won 53% of the votes in the 2021 presidential election to become the first female president of Honduras, bringing an end to the 12-year reign of the right-wing National Party. Her husband Manuel Zelaya held the same office from 2006 until 2009. Castro's government re-nationalized the nation's telecommunications and energy industries, subsidized electricity, education and school meals for more than a million impoverished families, and extended financial aid to students and the elderly. The government made major investments in the construction of eight new hospitals and in the electricity grid. The government also focused on shutting down special economic zones. The Castro government sought to diversify Honduras's agricultural production by incentivizing farmers to grow food in addition to cash crops through low-interest loans, domestic production quotas, and investments in the agricultural sector. Castro's Libre party was not able to gain control of congress and was consequently unable to nationalize private land, leading to protests and dissatisfaction among the rural poor.
In April 2022, former President Juan Orlando Hernández, who had served two terms between 2014 and January 2022, was extradited to the United States to face charges of drug trafficking and money laundering. In 2025 Hernández was pardoned by the Trump administration. Nasry Asfura was declared the winner of the 2025 Honduran election, with Castro and both of Asfura's opponents, Salvador Nasralla and Rixi Moncada, alleging fraud. Roughly 14.5% of the electoral tally sheets contained inconsistencies and required a review. On 27 January 2026,  Nasry Asfura was sworn in as president.

## Geography
The north coast of Honduras borders the Caribbean Sea, and the Pacific Ocean lies south through the Gulf of Fonseca. Honduras consists mainly of mountains, with narrow plains along the coasts. A large undeveloped lowland jungle, La Mosquitia, lies in the northeast and the heavily populated lowland Sula valley in the northwest. 
The Islas de la Bahía and the Swan Islands are off the north coast. Misteriosa Bank and Rosario Bank, 130 to 150 kilometres (81 to 93 miles) north of the Swan Islands, fall within the exclusive economic zone of Honduras. Natural resources include timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore, antimony, coal, fish, shrimp, and hydropower.

## Climate
The climate varies from tropical in the lowlands to temperate in the mountains. The Pacific coast is generally drier than the Caribbean.

## Biodiversity
The region is considered a biodiversity hotspot because of the many plant and animal species found there. Like other countries in the region, it contains vast biological resources, with more than 6,000 species of vascular plants, of which 630 (described so far) are orchids; around 250 reptiles and amphibians; more than 700 bird species; and 110 mammalian species, of which half are bats. In the northeastern region of La Mosquitia lies the Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve, a lowland rainforest which is home to a great diversity of life. The reserve became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982.
Honduras has rain forests, cloud forests (which can rise up to nearly 3,000 metres or 9,800 feet above sea level), mangroves, savannas and mountain ranges with pine and oak trees, and the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System. In the Bay Islands there are bottlenose dolphins, manta rays, parrot fish, schools of blue tang and whale shark.
Deforestation resulting from logging is rampant in Olancho Department. The clearing of land for agriculture is prevalent in the largely undeveloped La Mosquitia region, causing land degradation and soil erosion. Honduras had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.48/10, ranking it 126th globally out of 172 countries. Lake Yojoa, which is Honduras's largest source of fresh water, is polluted by heavy metals produced from mining activities. Some rivers and streams are also polluted by mining.

## Government and politics
Honduras is governed within a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic. The President of Honduras is both head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the Honduran government. Legislative power is vested in the National Congress of Honduras. The judiciary is independent of both the executive branch and the legislature.
The National Congress of Honduras (Congreso Nacional) has 128 members (diputados), elected for a four-year term by proportional representation. Congressional seats are assigned the parties' candidates on a departmental basis in proportion to the number of votes each party receives.

## Political culture
Following the 1963 military coup, a string of authoritarian military governments held power uninterrupted until 1981, when Roberto Suazo Córdova was elected president. The party system was dominated by the conservative National Party of Honduras (Partido Nacional de Honduras: PNH) and the liberal Liberal Party of Honduras (Partido Liberal de Honduras: PLH) until the 2009 Honduran coup d'état removed Zelaya from office and put Roberto Micheletti in his place.
In late 2012, 1,540 persons were interviewed by ERIC in collaboration with the Jesuit university, as reported by Associated Press. The survey found that 60% believed the police were involved in crime, 45% had "no confidence" in the Supreme Court, and 72% thought there was electoral fraud in the primary elections of November 2012. Also, 56% expected the presidential, legislative and municipal elections of 2013 to be fraudulent.

## Administrative divisions
Honduras is divided into 18 departments. The capital city is Tegucigalpa in the Central District within the department of Francisco Morazán.

Atlántida
Choluteca
Colón
Comayagua
Copán
Cortés
El Paraíso
Francisco Morazán
Gracias a Dios
Intibucá
Bay Islands
La Paz
Lempira
Ocotepeque
Olancho
Santa Bárbara
Valle
Yoro
A new administrative division called ZEDE (Zonas de empleo y desarrollo económico) was created in 2013. ZEDEs have a high level of autonomy with their own political system at a judicial, economic and administrative level, and are based on free market capitalism.

## Foreign relations
Honduras and Nicaragua had tense relations throughout 2000 and early 2001 due to a boundary dispute off the Atlantic coast. Nicaragua imposed a 35% tariff against Honduran goods due to the dispute.
In June 2009 a coup d'état ousted President Zelaya; he was taken in a military aircraft to Costa Rica. The General Assembly of the United Nations voted to denounce the coup and called for the restoration of Zelaya. Several Latin American nations, including Mexico, temporarily severed diplomatic relations with Honduras. In July 2010, full diplomatic relations were once again re-established with Mexico. The United States sent out mixed messages after the coup; U.S. President Obama called the ouster a coup and expressed support for Zelaya's return to power. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton—advised by John Negroponte, the former Reagan-era ambassador to Honduras implicated in the Iran–Contra affair—refrained from expressing support. She later explained that the US would have had to cut aid if it called Zelaya's ouster a military coup, although the US has a record of ignoring these events when it chooses. Zelaya had expressed an interest in Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez' Bolivarian Alliance for Peoples of our America (ALBA) and had actually joined in 2008. After the 2009 coup, Honduras withdrew its membership.
This interest in regional agreements may have increased the alarm of establishment politicians. When Zelaya began calling for a "fourth ballot box" to determine whether Hondurans wished to convoke a special constitutional congress, this sounded a lot to some like the constitutional amendments that had extended the terms of both Chávez and Bolivian president Evo Morales. "Chávez has served as a role model for like-minded leaders intent on cementing their power. These presidents are barely in office when they typically convene a constitutional convention to guarantee their reelection," said a 2009 Spiegel International analysis, which noted that one reason to join ALBA was discounted Venezuelan oil. In addition to Chávez and Morales, Argentinian presiden Carlos Menem, Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and Colombian President Álvaro Uribe had all taken this step, and Washington and the EU were both accusing the Sandinista National Liberation Front government in Nicaragua of tampering with election results. Politicians of all stripes expressed opposition to Zelaya's referendum proposal, and the attorney-general accused him of violating the constitution. The Honduran Supreme Court agreed, saying that the constitution had put the Supreme Electoral Tribunal in charge of elections and referendums, not the National Statistics Institute, which Zelaya had proposed to have run the count. Whether or not Zelaya's removal from power had constitutional elements, the Honduran constitution explicitly protects all Hondurans from forced expulsion from Honduras.
The United States maintains a small military presence at one Honduran base. The two countries conduct joint military exercises in peacekeeping, counter-narcotics, humanitarian, disaster relief, as well as humanitarian, medical and civic action. U.S. troops conduct and provide logistics support for a variety of bilateral and multilateral exercises. The United States is Honduras's chief trading partner.
Honduras has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.

## Military
Honduras has an army, a navy and an air force. In 2017, Honduras signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

## Poverty
The World Bank categorizes Honduras as a low middle-income nation. The per capita income is around US$4,000, making it one of the lowest in North America and Central America. In 2016, more than 66% of the population was living below the poverty line.
Economic growth has averaged 7% per year, one of the highest rates in Latin America as of 2010. Despite this, Honduras has seen the least development amongst all Central American countries. Honduras is ranked 130 of 188 countries with a Human Development Index of .625 that classifies the nation as having medium development (2015). The three factors that go into HDI (an extended and healthy life, accessibility of knowledge and standard of living) have all improved since 1990 but still remain relatively low with life expectancy at birth being 73.3, expected years of schooling being 11.2 (mean of 6.2 years) and GNI per capita being $4,466 (2015). The HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.751 with life expectancy at birth being 68.6, expected years of schooling being 11.5 (mean of 6.6) and GNI per capita being $6,281 (2015).
The 2009 Honduran coup d'état led to a variety of economic trends in the nation. Overall growth averaged 5.7 percent from 2006 to 2008 but slowed to 3.5 percent annually between 2010 and 2013. The nation saw a poverty increase of 13.2 percent and in extreme poverty of 26.3 percent in just 3 years. Furthermore, unemployment grew between 2008 and 2012 from 6.8 percent to 14.1 percent.
Because much of the economy is based on small scale agriculture of only a few exports, natural disasters have a particularly devastating impact. Natural disasters, such as 1998 Hurricane Mitch, have contributed to this inequality as they particularly affect poor rural areas. Additionally, they are a large contributor to food insecurity in the country as farmers are left unable to provide for their families. A study done by Honduras NGO, World Neighbors, determined the terms "increased workload, decreased basic grains, expensive food, and fear" were most associated with Hurricane Mitch.
The rural and urban poor were hit hardest by Hurricane Mitch. Those in southern and western regions specifically were considered most vulnerable as they both were subject to environmental destruction and home to many subsistence farmers. The agricultural economic sector has declined a third in the past 20 years, mostly representing a decline in exports, such as bananas and coffee, that were affected by natural disasters. Indigenous communities along the Patuca River were hit hard as well. The mid-Pataca region was almost completely destroyed. Over 80% of rice harvest and all of banana, plantain, and manioc harvests were lost. Relief and reconstruction efforts following the storm were partial and incomplete, reinforcing existing levels of poverty rather than reversing those levels, especially for indigenous communities. The period between the end of food donations and the following harvest led to extreme hunger, causing deaths amongst the Tawahka population. Those that were considered the most "land-rich" lost 36% of their total land on average. Those that were the most "land-poor", lost less total land but a greater share of their overall total. This meant that those hit hardest were single women as they constitute the majority of this population.

## Poverty reduction strategies
Since the 1970s when Honduras was designated a "food priority country" by the UN, organizations such as World Food Programme (WFP) have worked to decrease malnutrition and food insecurity. Currently one fourth of children are affected by chronic malnutrition. WFP is currently working with the Honduran government on a school feeding program which provides meals for 21,000 schools, reaching 1.4 million school children. WFP also participates in disaster relief through reparations and emergency response in order to aid in quick recovery that tackles the effects of natural disasters on agricultural production.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy was implemented in 1999 and aimed to cut extreme poverty in half by 2015. While spending on poverty-reduction aid increased, there was only a 2.5% increase in GDP between 1999 and 2002. This improvement left Honduras still below that of countries that lacked aid through Poverty Reduction Strategy behind those without it. The World Bank believes that this inefficiency stems from a lack of focus on infrastructure and rural development. Extreme poverty saw a low of 36.2 percent only two years after the implementation of the strategy but then increased to 66.5 percent by 2012. 
Poverty Reduction Strategies were intended to affect social policy through increased investment in education and health sectors. This was expected to lift poor communities out of poverty while also increasing the workforce as a means of stimulating the Honduran economy. Conditional cash transfers were used to do this by the Family Assistance Program. This program was restructured in 1998 in an attempt to increase effectiveness of cash transfers for health and education specifically for those in extreme poverty. Overall spending within Poverty Reduction Strategies have been focused on education and health sectors increasing social spending from 44% of Honduras's GDP in 2000 to 51% in 2004.
Critics of aid from International Finance Institutions believe that the World Bank's Poverty Reduction Strategy result in little substantive change to Honduran policy. Poverty Reduction Strategies also excluded clear priorities, specific intervention strategy, strong commitment to the strategy and more effective macro-level economic reforms according to Jose Cuesta of Cambridge University. Due to this he believes that the strategy did not provide a pathway for economic development that could lift Honduras out of poverty resulting in neither lasting economic growth of poverty reduction.
Prior to its 2009 coup Honduras widely expanded social spending and an extreme increase in minimum wage. Efforts to decrease inequality were swiftly reversed following the coup. When Zelaya was removed from office social spending as a percent of GDP decreased from 13.3 percent in 2009 to 10.9 recent in 2012. This decrease in social spending exacerbated the effects of the recession, which the nation was previously relatively well equipped to deal with.

## Economic inequality
Levels of income inequality are higher than in any other Latin American country. Unlike other Latin American countries, inequality steadily increased between 1991 and 2005. Between 2006 and 2010 inequality saw a decrease but increased again in 2010.
When the Human Development Index is adjusted for inequality (known as the IHDI) Honduras's development index is reduced to .443. The levels of inequality in each aspect of development can also be assessed. In 2015 inequality of life expectancy at birth was 19.6%, inequality in education was 24.4% and inequality in income was 41.5%  The overall loss in human development due to inequality was 29.2.
The IHDI for Latin America and the Caribbean overall is 0.575 with an overall loss of 23.4%. In 2015 inequality of life expectancy at birth was 22.9%, inequality in education was 14.0%, and inequality in income was 34.9%. While Honduras has a higher life expectancy (before and after inequality adjustments), its quality of education and economic standard of living are lower. Income inequality and education inequality have a large impact on the overall development of the nation.
Inequality also exists between rural and urban areas as it relates to the distribution of resources. Poverty is concentrated in southern, eastern, and western regions where rural and indigenous peoples live. North and central Honduras are home to the country's industries and infrastructure, resulting in lower levels of poverty. Poverty is concentrated in rural Honduras, a pattern that is reflected throughout Latin America. The effects of poverty on rural communities are vast. Poor communities typically live in adobe homes, lack material resources, have limited access to medical resources, and live off of basics such as rice, maize and beans.
The lower class predominantly consists of rural subsistence farmers and landless peasants. Since 1965 there has been an increase in the number of landless peasants in Honduras which has led to a growing class of urban poor individuals. These individuals often migrate to urban centers in search of work in the service sector, manufacturing, or construction. Demographers believe that without social and economic reform, rural to urban migration will increase, resulting in the expansion of urban centers. Within the lower class, underemployment is a major issue. Individuals that are underemployed often only work as part-time laborers on seasonal farms meaning their annual income remains low. In the 1980s peasant organizations and labor unions such as the National Federation of Honduran Peasants, The National Association of Honduran Peasants and the National Union of Peasants formed.

It is not uncommon for rural individuals to voluntarily enlist in the military, however this often does not offer stable or promising career opportunities. The majority of high-ranking officials in the army are recruited from military academies. Additionally, the majority of enlistment in the military is forced, which largely relies on an alliance between the government, military and the upper class. In urban areas males are often sought out from secondary schools while in rural areas roadblocks aided the military in handpicking recruits. Higher socio-economic status enables individuals to more easily evade the draft.
The middle class is a small group defined by relatively low income levels. Movement from lower to middle class is typically facilitated by higher education. Professionals, students, farmers, merchants, business employees, and civil servants are all considered a part of the middle class. Opportunities for employment and the industrial and commercial sectors are slow-growing, limiting the middle class. The upper class has much higher income levels, reflecting large amounts of income inequality. Much of the upper class affords their success to the growth of cotton and livestock exports post-World War II. The wealthy are not politically unified and differ in political and economic views.

## Trade
The currency is the Honduran lempira. In 2005 Honduras signed CAFTA, a free trade agreement with the United States. In December 2005, Puerto Cortés, the primary seaport of Honduras, was included in the U.S. Container Security Initiative. Gold, silver, lead and zinc are mined.
The government operates both the electrical grid, Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE) and the land-line telephone service, Hondutel. ENEE receives heavy subsidies to counter its chronic financial problems, but Hondutel is no longer a monopoly. The telecommunication sector was opened to private investment in 2005, as required under CAFTA. The price of petroleum is regulated, and the Congress often ratifies temporary price regulation for basic commodities.
In 2006 the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Energy announced the first phase of the Secure Freight Initiative), which built upon existing port security measures, gives the U.S. government enhanced authority, allowing it to scan containers from overseas for nuclear and radiological materials in order to improve the risk assessment of individual US-bound containers. The Secure Freight Initiative is in place in Puerto Cortés.
For economic development a 2012 memorandum of understanding with a group of international investors obtained Honduran government approval to build a zone (city) with its own laws, tax system, judiciary and police, but opponents brought a suit against it in the Supreme Court, calling it a "state within a state". In 2013, Congress ratified Decree 120, which led to the establishment of Zone for Employment and Economic Development. The government began construction of the first zones in June 2015.

## Energy
About half of the electricity sector in Honduras is privately owned. The remaining generation capacity is run by ENEE (Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica).
Key challenges in the sector are:

Financing investments in generation and transmission without either a financially healthy utility or concessionary funds from external donors
Re-balancing tariffs, cutting arrears and reducing losses, including electricity theft, without social unrest
Reconciling environmental concerns with government objectives – two large new dams and associated hydropower plants.
Improving access to electricity in rural areas.

## Transportation
Infrastructure for transport in Honduras consists of: 699 kilometres (434 miles) of railways; 13,603 kilometres (8,453 miles) of roadways; six ports; and 112 airports altogether (12 Paved, 100 unpaved). The Ministry of Public Works, Transport and Housing is responsible for transport sector policy.

## Demographics
Honduras had a population of 10,278,345 in 2021. The proportion of the population below age 15 in 2010 was 36.8%; 58.9% were between 15 and 65 years old, and 4.3% were 65 years old or older.
Since 1975, emigration from Honduras has accelerated as economic migrants and political refugees sought a better life elsewhere. A majority of expatriate Hondurans live in the United States. A 2012 US State Department estimate suggested that between 800,000 and one million Hondurans lived in the United States at that time, nearly 15% of the Honduran population. The large uncertainty about numbers is because numerous Hondurans live in the United States without a visa. In the 2010 census in the United States, 617,392 residents identified as Hondurans, up from 217,569 in 2000.

## Race and ethnicity
According to the 2013 census, the ethnic breakdown was 83% mestizo, 8% white, 7% indigenous (primarily Lenca), and 2% black. The 1927 Honduran census provides no racial data, but in 1930 five classifications were created: white, Indian, Negro, yellow, and mestizo. This system was used in the 1935 and 1940 census. Mestizo was used to describe individuals that did not fit neatly into the categories of white, American Indian, negro or yellow or who are of mixed white-American Indian descent.
John Gillin considers Honduras to be one of 13 "Mestizo countries" (Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, Cuba, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay). He claims that in much of Spanish America little attention is paid to race and race mixture resulting in social status having little reliance on one's physical features. However, in "Mestizo countries," this is not the case. Social stratification from Spain was able to develop in these countries through colonization.
During colonization the majority of the indigenous population died of diseases like smallpox and measles resulting in a more homogenous indigenous population compared to other colonies. Nine indigenous and African groups are recognized by the government. The majority of Amerindians are Lenca, followed by the Miskito, Cho'rti', Tolupan, Pech and Sumo. Around 50,000 Lenca individuals live in the west and western interior, while the other small native groups are located throughout the country.
The majority of blacks are ladino, meaning they are culturally Latino. Non-ladino groups include the Garifuna, Miskito, Bay Island Creoles, and Arab immigrants. The Garifunas descended from freed slaves on Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The Bay Island Creoles are the descendants of freed African slaves from the British Empire, which administered the Bay Islands from early 17th century to 1850. The Creoles, the Garinagu, and the Miskitos are racially diverse. While the Garinagu and Miskitos have similar origins, Garifunas are considered black while Miskitos are considered indigenous. This is largely a reflection of cultural differences, as Garinagu have retained much of their original African culture. The majority of Arab Hondurans are of Palestinian and Lebanese descent. They are known as "turcos" because of migration during the rule of the Ottoman Empire. They have maintained cultural distinctiveness and prospered economically.

## Gender
The male to female ratio is 1.01. This ratio stands at 1.05 at birth, 1.04 from 15 to 24 years old, 1.02 from 25 to 54 years old, .88 from 55 to 64 years old, and .77 for those 65 years or older. The Gender Development Index (GDI) was .942 in 2015 with an HDI of .600 for females and .637 for males. Life expectancy at birth for males is 70.9 and 75.9 for females. Expected years of schooling is 10.9 years for males (mean of 6.1) and 11.6 for females (mean of 6.2). These measures do not reveal a large disparity between male and female development levels, however, GNI per capita is vastly different by gender. Males have a GNI per capita of $6,254 while that of females is only $2,680. Honduras's overall GDI is higher than that of other medium HDI nations (.871) but lower than the overall HDI for Latin America and the Caribbean (.981).
The United Nations Development Program ranks Honduras 116th for measures including women's political power, and female access to resources. The Gender Inequality Index (GII)depicts gender-based inequalities according to reproductive health, empowerment, and economic activity. Honduras has a GII of .461 and ranked 101 of 159 countries in 2015. 25.8% of parliament is female, and 33.4% of adult females have a secondary education or higher while 31.1% of adult males do. Despite this, while male participation in the labor market is 84.4, female participation is 47.2%. The maternal mortality ratio is 129, and the adolescent birth rate is 65.0 for women ages 15–19.
Familialism and machismo carry a lot of weight within society. Familialism refers to the idea of individual interests being second to that of the family, most often in relation to dating and marriage, abstinence, and parental approval and supervision of dating. Aggression and proof of masculinity through physical dominance are characteristic of machismo. Honduras has historically functioned with a patriarchal system like many other Latin American countries. Men claim responsibility for family decisions including reproductive health decisions. Recently Honduras has seen an increase in challenges to this notion as feminist movements and access to global media increases. There has been an increase in educational attainment, labor force participating, urban migration, late-age marriage, and contraceptive use amongst women.
Between 1971 and 2001 total fertility rate decreased from 7.4 births to 4.4 births. This is largely attributable to an increase in educational attainment and workforce participation by women, as well as more widespread use of contraceptives. In 1996 50% of women were using at least one type of contraceptive. By 2001 62% were largely due to female sterilization, birth control in the form of a pill, injectable birth control, and IUDs. A study done in 2001 reflects conceptualization of reproductive health and decision making in Honduras; 28% of men and 25% of women surveyed believed men were responsible for decisions regarding family size and family planning uses; 21% of men believed men were responsible for both.
Sexual violence against women has proven to be a large issue that has caused many to migrate to the U.S. The prevalence of child sexual abuse was 7.8% with the majority of reports being from children under age 11. Women that experienced sexual abuse as children were found to be twice as likely to be in violent relationships. Femicide is widespread. In 2014, 40% of unaccompanied refugee minors were female. Gangs are largely responsible for sexual violence against women as they often use sexual violence. Between 2005 and 2013 according to the UN Special Repporteur on Violence Against Women, violent deaths increased 263.4 percent. Impunity for sexual violence and femicide crimes was 95 percent in 2014. Additionally, many girls are forced into human trafficking and prostitution.
Between 1995 and 1997 Honduras recognized domestic violence as both a public health issue and a punishable offense due to efforts by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). PAHO's subcommittee on Women, Health and Development was used as a guide to develop programs that aid in domestic violence prevention and victim assistance programs. However, a study done in 2009 showed that while the policy requires health care providers to report cases of sexual violence, emergency contraception, and victim referral to legal institutions and support groups, very few other regulations exist within the realm of registry, examination and follow-up. Unlike other Central American countries, Honduras does not have detailed guidelines requiring service providers to be extensively trained and respect the rights of sexual violence victims. Since the study was done the UNFPA and the Health Secretariat of Honduras have worked to develop and implement improved guidelines for handling cases of sexual violence.
An educational program known as Sistema de Aprendizaje Tutorial (SAT) has attempted to "undo gender" through focusing on gender equality in everyday interactions. The SAT program is one of the largest in the world, second only to Colombia's with 6,000 students. It is currently sponsored by Asociacion Bayan, a Honduran NGO, and the Ministry of Education. It functions by integrating gender into curriculum topics, linking gender to the ideas of justice and equality, encouraging reflection, dialogue and debate and emphasizing the need for individual and social change. This program was found to increase gender consciousness and a desire for gender equality amongst Honduran women through encouraging discourse surrounding existing gender inequality in the communities.

## Languages
Spanish is the official, national language, spoken by virtually all Hondurans. In addition to Spanish, numerous indigenous languages are spoken in some small communities. Other languages spoken by some include Honduran sign language and Bay Islands Creole English.
The main indigenous languages are:

Garifuna (Arawakan) (almost 100,000 speakers in Honduras including monolinguals)
Mískito (Misumalpan) (29,000 speakers in Honduras)
Mayangna (Misumalpan) (less than 1000 speakers in Honduras, more in Nicaragua)
Pech/Paya, (Chibchan) (less than 1000 speakers)
Tol (Jicaquean) (less than 500 speakers)
Ch'orti' (Mayan) (less than 50 speakers)
The Lenca isolate lost all its fluent native speakers in the 20th century but is currently undergoing revival efforts among the members of the ethnic population of about 100,000. The largest immigrant languages are Arabic (42,000), Armenian (1,300), Turkish (900), Yue Chinese (1,000).

## Religion
Historically, Honduras had been predominantly Catholic. Protestant Christianity is now the largest religion in Honduras. The 2025 CIA Factbook lists Honduras as 55% Protestant and 34% Catholic. The 2008 International Religious Freedom Report notes that 51.4% of the population identified themselves as Catholic, 36.2% as evangelical Protestant, 1.3% claiming to be from other religions, including Muslims, Buddhists, Jews, Rastafarians, etc. and 11.1% do not belong to any religion or unresponsive. 8% reported as being either atheistic or agnostic. Previous customary Catholic church tallies of membership, where priests (in more than 185 parishes) filled out a pastoral account of their parishes each year, estimated 81% Catholic.
Commenting on statistical variations everywhere, John Green of Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life notes "It isn't that ... numbers are more right than [someone else's] numbers ... but how one conceptualizes the group." Often people attend one church without giving up their "home" church. Many who attend evangelical megachurches in the US, for example, attend more than one church. This shifting and fluidity is common in Brazil where two-fifths of those who were raised evangelical are no longer evangelical and Catholics seem to shift in and out of various churches, often while still remaining Catholic.
Most pollsters suggest an annual poll taken over several years would provide the best method of knowing religious demographics and variations in any single country. Still, in Honduras are thriving Anglican, Presbyterian, Methodist, Seventh-day Adventist, Lutheran, Latter-day Saint (Mormon) and Pentecostal churches. There are Protestant seminaries. The Catholic Church maintains a presence through schools, hospitals, and pastoral institutions (including its own medical school) that it operates. Its archbishop, Cardinal Óscar Andrés Rodriguez Maradiaga, is also very popular with the government, other churches, and in his own church. Practitioners of the Buddhist, Jewish, Islamic, Baháʼí, Rastafari and indigenous denominations and religions exist.

## Education
About 83.6% of the population are literate, and the net primary enrollment rate was 94% in 2004. In 2014, the primary school completion rate was 90.7%. Honduras has bilingual (Spanish and English) and even trilingual (Spanish with English, Arabic, or German) schools and numerous universities.
The higher education is governed by the National Autonomous University of Honduras which has centers in the large cities. Honduras was ranked 119th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

## Crime
Crime in Honduras is rampant, and criminals operate with a high degree of impunity. Honduras has one of the highest national murder rates in the world; cities such as San Pedro Sula and the Tegucigalpa have registered homicide rates among the highest in the world. The violence is associated with drug trafficking as Honduras is often a transit point, and with several urban gangs, mainly the MS-13 and the 18th Street gang. Homicide violence reached a peak in 2012 with an average of 20 homicides per day. Official statistics from the Honduran Observatory on National Violence show the homicide rate was 60 per 100,000 in 2015 with the majority of homicide cases unprosecuted. But as recently as 2017, organizations such as InSight Crime's show figures of 42 per 100,000 inhabitants, a 26% drop from 2016 figures.
Highway assaults and carjackings at roadblocks or checkpoints set up by criminals with police uniforms and equipment occur frequently. Although reports of kidnappings of foreigners are not common, families of kidnapping victims often pay ransoms without reporting the crime to police out of fear of retribution, so kidnapping figures may be underreported.
Violence increased after Plan Colombia was implemented and after Mexican President Felipe Calderón declared the war against drug trafficking in Mexico. Along with El Salvador and Guatemala, Honduras forms part of the Northern Triangle of Central America, which has been characterized as one of the most violent regions in the world. As a result of crime and increasing murder rates, the flow of migrants from Honduras to the U.S. also went up. The rise in violence in the region has received international attention.
Roatán and the other Bay Islands have lower crime rates than the mainland. This has been attributed to measures taken by government and business in 2014 to improve tourist safety. In the less populated region of Gracias a Dios, narcotics-trafficking is rampant and police presence is scarce. Threats against U.S. citizens by drug traffickers and other criminal organizations have resulted in the U.S. Embassy placing restrictions on the travel of U.S. officials through the region.

## National symbols
The flag of Honduras is composed of three equal horizontal stripes. The blue upper and lower stripes represent the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. The central stripe is white. It contains five blue stars representing the five states of the Central American Union. The middle star represents Honduras, located in the center of the Central American Union.
The coat of arms was established in 1945. It is an equilateral triangle, at the base is a volcano between three castles, over which is a rainbow and the sun shining. The triangle is placed on an area that symbolizes being bathed by both seas. Around all of this an oval containing in golden lettering: "Republic of Honduras, Free, Sovereign and Independent".
The "National Anthem of Honduras" is a result of a contest carried out in 1914 during the presidency of Manuel Bonilla. Poet Augusto Coello wrote the anthem, with German-born Honduran composer Carlos Hartling writing the music. The anthem was officially adopted on 15 November 1915, during the presidency of Alberto de Jesús Membreño.
The national flower is the orchid Rhyncholaelia digbyana, which replaced the rose in 1969. The change of the national flower was carried out during the administration of general Oswaldo López Arellano, thinking that Brassavola digbyana "is an indigenous plant of Honduras; having this flower exceptional characteristics of beauty, vigor and distinction", as the decree dictates it.
The national tree was declared in 1928 to be simply "the Pine that appears symbolically in our Coat of Arms" (el Pino que figura simbólicamente en nuestro Escudo), even though pines comprise a genus and not a species, and even though legally there's no specification as for what kind of pine should appear in the coat of arms either. Because of its commonality in the country, the Pinus oocarpa species has become since then the species most strongly associated as the national tree, but legally it is not so. Another species associated as the national tree is the Pinus caribaea.
The national mammal is the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), which was adopted as a measure to avoid excessive depredation. It is one of two endemic species of deer. The national bird is the scarlet macaw (Ara macao). This bird was much valued by the pre-Columbian civilizations of Honduras.

## Celebrations
National holidays include Honduras Independence Day on 15 September and Children's Day or Día del Niño, which is celebrated in homes, schools and churches on 10 September; on this day, children receive presents and have parties similar to Christmas or birthday celebrations. Some neighborhoods have piñatas on the street. Other holidays are Easter, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, Day of the Soldier (3 October to celebrate the birth of Francisco Morazán), Christmas, El Dia de Lempira on 20 July, and New Year's Eve.
Independence Day festivities start early in the morning with marching bands. Each band wears different colors and features cheerleaders. Fiesta Catracha takes place this same day: typical Honduran foods such as beans, tamales, baleadas, cassava with chicharrón, and tortillas are offered.
On Christmas Eve people reunite with their families and close friends to have dinner, then give out presents at midnight. In some cities fireworks are seen and heard at midnight. On New Year's Eve there is food and "cohetes", fireworks and festivities. Birthdays are also great events, and include piñatas filled with candies and surprises for the children.
La Ceiba Carnival is celebrated in La Ceiba in the north coast in the second half of May to celebrate the day of the city's patron saint Isidore. People from all over the world come for one week of festivities. Every night there is a little carnaval (carnavalito) in a neighborhood. On Saturday there is a big parade with floats and displays with people from many countries. This celebration is also accompanied by the Milk Fair, where many Hondurans come to show off their farm products and animals.

## Art
The most renowned painter is José Antonio Velásquez. Other important painters include Carlos Garay, and Roque Zelaya. Notable writers include Lucila Gamero de Medina, Froylán Turcios, Ramón Amaya Amador and Juan Pablo Suazo Euceda, Marco Antonio Rosa, Roberto Sosa, Eduardo Bähr, Amanda Castro, Javier Abril Espinoza, Teófilo Trejo, and Roberto Quesada.
The José Francisco Saybe theater in San Pedro Sula is home to the Círculo Teatral Sampedrano (Theatrical Circle of San Pedro Sula) Honduras has experienced a boom from its film industry for the past two decades. Since the premiere of the movie "Anita la cazadora de insectos" in 2001, the level of Honduran productions has increased, many collaborating with countries such as Mexico, Colombia, and the United States. The most well known Honduran films are El Xendra, Amor y Frijoles, and Cafe con aroma a mi tierra.

## Folklore
Legends and fairy tales are paramount, such as Lluvia de Peces (Rain of Fish). The legends of El Cadejo and La Llorona are also popular.

## Music
Punta is the main music of Honduras, with other sounds such as Caribbean salsa, merengue, reggae, and reggaeton all widely heard, especially in the north, and Mexican rancheras heard in the rural interior of the country. The most well known musicians are Guillermo Anderson and Polache. Banda Blanca is a widely known music group in both Honduras and internationally.

## Media
At least half of households have at least one television. Public television has a far smaller role than in most other countries. The main newspapers are La Prensa, El Heraldo, La Tribuna and Diario Tiempo. The official newspaper is La Gaceta.

## Cuisine
Honduran cuisine is a fusion of indigenous Lenca cuisine, Spanish cuisine, Caribbean cuisine and African cuisine. There are also dishes from the Garifuna people. Coconut and coconut milk are featured in both sweet and savory dishes. Regional specialties include fried fish, tamales, carne asada and baleadas. Other popular dishes include meat roasted with chismol and carne asada, chicken with rice and corn, and fried fish with pickled onions and jalapeños. Some of the ways seafood and meats are prepared in coastal areas and in the Bay Islands involve coconut milk.
The soups Hondurans enjoy include bean soup, mondongo soup (tripe soup), seafood soups and beef soups. Generally these soups are served mixed with plantains, yuca, and cabbage, and served with corn tortillas. Other typical dishes are the montucas or corn tamales, stuffed tortillas, and tamales wrapped in plantain leaves. Honduran typical dishes also include an abundant selection of tropical fruits such as papaya, pineapple, plum, sapote, passion fruit and bananas which are prepared in many ways while they are still green.

## Sports
Football is the most popular sport in Honduras. Honduras's first international competition began in 1921 at the Independence Centenary Games featuring neighboring countries in Central America. The highest division of football is The Honduran National Professional Football League (Spanish: La Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional de Honduras), which was established in 1964. The league is recognized on a continental level, as C.D. Olimpia–the only Honduran club to win the competition–won the CONCACAF Champions League in 1972 and 1988. The Honduras national football team (Spanish: Selección de fútbol de Honduras) is considered one of the best nations in North America, as the country last won the CONCACAF Gold Cup in 1981 and placed third in 2013. On a global scale, Honduras has competed in the FIFA World Cup three times in 1982, 2010, and 2014, although Los Catrachos have yet to win a game.
Baseball is the second most popular sport. Honduras's first international competition began in 1950 in the Baseball World Cup, which was the most prestigious global competition at the time. The country lacks a division in baseball, likely due to the absence of competition in international baseball since 1973. The Honduras national baseball team (Spanish: Selección de béisbol de Honduras) is shy of being a top ten nation in North and South America due to infrequent scheduling, although competition is consistent and growing at the youth level. Inspiration at the youth level came from Mauricio Dubón being the first born and raised Honduran to start in Major League Baseball, who is currently competing today.
All other sports tend to be minor at best, as Honduras has not won a medal in the Olympics and has not made notable results in other world championships. However, Hondurans have consistently entered track & field and swimming games at the Summer Olympics since 1968 and 1984, respectively. Occasionally, Honduras has competed in combat sports ranging from judo to boxing at the Summer Olympics as well. Gender inequality is present in the sports industry, as teams like the Honduras women's national football team (Spanish: Selección de fútbol de Honduras Femenina) has yet to qualify in global and continental tournaments and softball being nearly nonexistent in the country.
