--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Albania
FILE_NAME: country_albania.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:43:40
----------------

# Albania

## General Overview
Albania, officially the Republic of Albania, is a country in Southeast Europe. It is located in the Balkans, on the Adriatic and Ionian Seas within the Mediterranean Sea, and shares land borders with Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east and Greece to the south. With an area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi), it has a varied range of climatic, geological, hydrological and morphological conditions. Albania's landscapes range from rugged snow-capped mountains in the Albanian Alps and the Korab, Skanderbeg, Pindus and Ceraunian Mountains, to fertile lowland plains extending from the Adriatic and Ionian seacoasts. Tirana is the capital and largest city in the country, followed by Durrës, Vlorë, and Shkodër.
Albania was inhabited by several Illyrian tribes, among them the Ardiaei, Bylliones, Dassaretii, Enchele, and Taulantians, with the Chaonians settled in the southwest. Several colonies were founded by the Ancient Greeks along the Albanian coast, most notably Apollonia. The Illyrians were the dominant power in Albania before the rise of Macedon. Following the Illyrian Wars, Albania was integrated into the Roman Empire and remained in the Byzantine Empire after its partition. During the Middle Ages, several Albanian principalities emerged, most notably the Principality of Arbanon, Kingdom of Albania, Principality of Albania and Albania Veneta. In the 15th century, Albania became a center of resistance against Ottoman expansion under the leadership of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg, whose military campaigns repelled Ottoman advances for over two decades. Although incorporated into the Ottoman Empire, Albania retained distinct cultural and social identities throughout four centuries of foreign rule, culminating in the Albanian Renaissance in the 19th century. Albania declared independence in 1912, followed by a turbulent 20th century marked by monarchy, foreign occupation during both World Wars, and a communist regime under Enver Hoxha.
Since its independence in 1912, Albania has undergone a number of political changes, transitioning from a monarchy to a communist regime before becoming a sovereign parliamentary constitutional republic. Governed by a constitution prioritising the separation of powers, the country's political structure includes a parliament, a ceremonial president, a functional prime minister and a hierarchy of courts. Albania is a developing country with an upper-middle income economy driven by the service sector, with manufacturing and tourism, which attracted over 11 million visitors in 2024, also playing significant roles. The illegal drug trade in Albania contributes around US$100 million to the economy per year. After the dissolution of its communist system, the country shifted from centralised planning to an open market economy. Albanian citizens have universal health care access and free primary and secondary education. The country is an official candidate for membership in the European Union, and has been negotiating accession since 2022.

Etymology
The origin of the name "Albania" can be traced back to medieval Latin and the association with the Illyrian tribe of the Albani. This connection is further supported  by the writings of the Ancient Greek geographer Ptolemy during the 2nd century AD, where he included the settlement of Albanopolis situated to the northeast of Durrës. The presence of a medieval settlement named Albanon or Arbanon hints at the possibility of historical continuity. The precise relationship between these historical references and the question of whether Albanopolis was synonymous with Albanon remain subjects of scholarly debate.
The Byzantine historian Michael Attaliates, in his 11th-century historical account, provides the earliest undisputed reference to the Albanians, when he mentions them as participants in a revolt against Constantinople in 1079. He also identifies the Arbanitai as subjects of the Duke of Dyrrachium. In the Middle Ages, Albania was denoted as Arbëri or Arbëni by its inhabitants, who identified themselves as Arbëreshë or Arbëneshë. Albanians employ the terms Shqipëri or Shqipëria for their nation, designations that trace their historical origins to the 14th century. But only in the late 17th and early 18th centuries did these terms gradually supersede Arbëria and Arbëreshë among Albanians. These two expressions are widely interpreted to symbolise "Children of the Eagles" and "Land of the Eagles".

History
Prehistory
Mesolithic habitation in Albania has been evidenced in several open-air sites which were close to the Adriatic coastline and in caves. Mesolithic objects found in a cave near Xarrë include flint and jasper objects along with fossilised animal bones, while those discoveries at Mount Dajt comprise bone and stone tools similar to those of the Aurignacian culture. The Neolithic era in Albania began around 7000 BC and is evidenced in finds which indicate domestication of sheep and goats and small-scale agriculture. A part of the Neolithic population may have been the same as the Mesolithic population of the southern Balkans, like in the Konispol cave, where the Mesolithic stratum co-exists with Pre-Pottery Neolithic finds. Cardium pottery culture appears in coastal Albania and across the Adriatic after 6500 BC, while the settlements of the interior took part in the processes that formed the Starčevo culture. The Albanian bitumen mines of Selenicë provide early evidence of bitumen exploitation in Europe, dating to Late Neolithic Albania (from 5000 BC), when local communities used it as pigment for ceramic decoration, waterproofing, and adhesive for repairing broken vessels. The bitumen of Selenicë circulated towards eastern Albania from the early 5th millennium BC. First evidence of its overseas trade export comes from the Neolithic and Bronze Age southern Italy. The high-quality bitumen of Selenicë has been exploited throughout all the historical ages since the Late Neolithic era until today.
The Indo-Europeanisation of Albania in the context of the IE-isation of the western Balkans began after 2800 BC. The presence of the Early Bronze Age tumuli in the vicinity of later Apollonia dates to 2679±174 calBC (2852–2505 calBC). These burial mounds belong to the southern expression of the Adriatic-Ljubljana culture (related to the later Cetina culture), which moved southwards along the Adriatic from the northern Balkans. The same community built similar mounds in Montenegro (Rakića Kuće) and northern Albania (Shtoj). The first archaeogenetic find related to the IE-isation of Albania involves a man with predominantly Yamnaya ancestry buried in a tumulus of northeastern Albania, which dates to 2663–2472 calBC. During the Middle Bronze Age, Cetina culture sites and finds appear in Albania. Cetina culture moved southwards across the Adriatic from the Cetina valley of Dalmatia. In Albania, Cetina finds are concentrated around southern Lake Shkodër and appear typically in tumulus cemeteries, such as in Shkrel and Shtoj, and hillforts like Gajtan (Shkodër), as well as cave sites like Blaz, Nezir, and Keputa (central Albania) and lake basin sites like Sovjan (southeastern Albania).

Antiquity
The incorporated territory of Albania was historically inhabited by Indo-European peoples, amongst them numerous Illyrian and Epirote tribes. There were also several Greek colonies. The territory referred to as Illyria corresponded roughly to the area east of the Adriatic Sea in the Mediterranean Sea, extending in the south to the mouth of the Vjosë. The first account of the Illyrian groups comes from the Periplus of the Euxine Sea, a Greek text written in the 4th century BC. The Bryges were also present in central Albania, while the south was inhabited by the Epirote Chaonians, whose capital was at Phoenice. Other colonies, such as Apollonia and Epidamnos, were established by Greek city-states on the coast by the 7th century BC.

The Illyrian Taulanti were a powerful Illyrian tribe among the earliest recorded tribes in the area. They lived in an area that corresponds with much of present-day Albania. Together with the Dardanian ruler Cleitus, Glaucias, the ruler of the Taulantian kingdom, fought against Alexander the Great at the Battle of Pelium in 335 BC. As time passed, the ruler of Ancient Macedonia, Cassander of Macedon, captured Apollonia and crossed the river Genusus (Albanian: Shkumbin) in 314 BC. A few years later, Glaucias laid siege to Apollonia and captured the Greek colony of Epidamnos.
The Illyrian Ardiaei tribe, centred in Montenegro, ruled over most of the territory of northern Albania. Their Ardiaean Kingdom reached its greatest extent under King Agron, the son of Pleuratus II. Agron extended his rule over other neighbouring tribes as well. Following Agron's death in 230 BC, his wife, Teuta, inherited the Ardiaean kingdom. Teuta's forces extended their operations further southwards to the Ionian Sea. In 229 BC, Rome declared war on the kingdom for extensively plundering Roman ships. The war ended in an Illyrian defeat in 227 BC. Teuta was eventually succeeded by Gentius in 181 BC. Gentius clashed with the Romans in 168 BC, initiating the Third Illyrian War. The conflict resulted in the Roman conquest of the region by 167 BC. The Romans split the region into three administrative divisions.

Middle Ages
The Roman Empire was split in 395 upon the death of Theodosius I into an Eastern and Western Roman Empire, in part because of the increasing pressure from threats during the Barbarian Invasions. From the 6th century into the 7th century, the Slavs crossed the Danube and largely absorbed the indigenous Greeks, Illyrians, and Thracians in the Balkans; thus, the Illyrians were mentioned for the last time in historical records in the 7th century.
In the 11th century, the Great Schism formalised the break of communion between the Eastern Orthodox and Western Catholic Church, which is reflected in Albania through the emergence of a Catholic north and Orthodox south. The Albanian people inhabited the west of Lake Ochrida and the upper valley of the River Shkumbin and established the Principality of Arbanon in 1190 under the leadership of Progon of Kruja. The realm was succeeded by his sons Gjin Progoni and Demetrio Progoni.
Upon the death of Dhimiter, the territory came under the rule of the Albanian-Greek Gregorios Kamonas and subsequently under the Golem of Kruja. In the 13th century, the principality was dissolved. Arbanon is considered to be the first sketch of an Albanian state, which retained a semi-autonomous status as the western extremity of the Byzantine Empire, under the Byzantine Doukai of Epirus or Laskarids of Nicaea.

Towards the end of the 12th and beginning of the 13th centuries, Serbs and Venetians began to take possession of the territory. The ethnogenesis of the Albanians is uncertain; however, the first undisputed mention of Albanians dates back in historical records from 1079 or 1080 in a work by Michael Attaleiates, who referred to the Albanoi as having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople. At this point, the Albanians were fully Christianised.
After the dissolution of Arbanon, Charles I of Anjou concluded an agreement with the Albanian rulers, promising to protect them and their ancient liberties. In 1272, he established the Kingdom of Albania and conquered regions back from the Despotate of Epirus. The kingdom claimed all of central Albania territory from Dyrrhachium along the Adriatic Sea coast down to Butrint. A Catholic political structure was a basis for the papal plans of spreading Catholicism in the Balkan Peninsula. This plan also found the support of Helen of Anjou. Around 30 Catholic churches and monasteries were built during her rule, mainly in northern Albania. Internal power struggles within the Byzantine Empire in the 14th century enabled Serbs' most powerful medieval ruler, Stefan Dušan, to establish a short-lived empire that included all of Albania except Durrës.

In 1367, Albanian rulers established the Despotate of Arta. During that time, several Albanian principalities were established, notably the Principality of Albania, the Principality of Kastrioti, the Lordship of Berat, and the Principality of Dukagjini. In the first half of the 15th century, the Ottoman Empire invaded most of Albania, and the League of Lezhë was organized under Skanderbeg as a ruler, who became the national hero of the Albanian medieval history.

Ottoman Empire
With the fall of Constantinople, the Ottoman Empire entered an extended period of military conquest and expansion, with its borders gradually expanding deep into Southeast Europe. In 1385, they reached the Albanian Ionian Sea Coast, while in 1415, they established their garrisons across Southern Albania, eventually occupying most of Albania in 1431. Thousands of Albanians consequently fled to Western Europe, particularly to Calabria, Naples, Ragusa, and Sicily, while numerous others sought protection at the often inaccessible Mountains of Albania. Since the vast majority of Albanians were adherents of Christianity, they were considered an inferior class of people, resulting in them being discriminated against in various forms, including being subjected to heavy taxes. Additionally, the Devshirme system allowed the Sultan to collect a requisite percentage of Christian adolescents from their families to compose the Janissary. The Ottoman conquest was also accompanied by the gradual process of Islamisation and the rapid construction of mosques.
A prosperous and longstanding revolution erupted after the formation of the League of Lezhë until the fall of Shkodër under the leadership of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg, who consistently defeated major Ottoman armies led by Sultans Murad II and Mehmed II. Skanderbeg managed to unite several of the Albanian principalities, amongst them the Arianitis, Dukagjinis, Zaharias, and Thopias, and establish a centralised authority over most of the non-conquered territories, becoming the Lord of Albania. The Ottoman Empire's expansion ground to a halt during the time that Skanderbeg's forces resisted, and he has been credited with being one of the main reasons for the delay of Ottoman expansion into Western Europe, giving the Italian principalities more time to better prepare for the Ottoman arrival. However, the failure of most European nations, with the exception of Naples, to adequately support him, along with the failure of Pope Pius II's plans to organise a promised crusade against the Ottomans, signified that none of Skanderbeg's victories permanently hindered the Ottomans from invading the Western Balkans.
Despite his competence as a military leader, Skanderbeg's victories over the Ottoman Empire's military had only a short-term impact, as his forces were unable to halt the Ottomans' advancement permanently; therefore, they successfully delayed the final conquest of Albanian lands only temporarily. The constant Ottoman invasions caused enormous destruction to Albania, greatly reducing the population and destroying flocks of livestock and crops. Besides surrender, there was no possible way Skanderbeg would be able to halt the Ottoman invasions despite his military forces achieving several consecutive victories against them. Among other factors, his manpower and resources were insufficient for a prolonged war, preventing him from expanding the war efforts and driving the Turks from the Albanian borders. Albania was therefore doomed to face an unending series of Ottoman attacks until it eventually fell years after his death.
When the Ottomans were gaining a firm foothold in the region, Albanian towns were organised into four principal sanjaks. The government fostered trade by settling a sizeable Jewish colony of refugees fleeing persecution in Spain. The city of Vlorë saw passing through its ports imported merchandise from Europe, such as velvets, cotton goods, mohairs, carpets, spices, and leather from Bursa and Constantinople. Some citizens of Vlorë even had business associates throughout Europe.
The phenomenon of Islamisation among the Albanians became primarily widespread from the 17th century and continued into the 18th century. Islam offered them equal opportunities and advancement within the Ottoman Empire. However, according to some scholars, motives for conversion were diverse depending on the context; although the lack of source material significantly hampers efforts to investigate such issues. As a result of the Ottomans' increasing suppression of Catholicism, most Catholic Albanians converted in the 17th century, while Orthodox Albanians followed suit mainly in the following century.
Since the Albanian-inhabited regions were considered strategically important, Albanians made up a significant proportion of the Ottoman Empire's military and bureaucracy. Consequently, many Muslim Albanians attained important political and military positions, while their work made a significant cultural contribution to the broader Muslim world. Enjoying this privileged position, they held various high administrative positions, which, among others, included over two dozen Albanians serving as Grand viziers of the Ottoman Empire. Additionally, other distinguished Albanians included members of the prominent Köprülü family, Zagan Pasha, Muhammad Ali of Egypt, and Ali Pasha of Tepelena. Furthermore, two Ottoman sultans, Bayezid II and Mehmed III, were born to mothers of Albanian ethnic backgrounds.

Rilindja
The Albanian Renaissance was a period with its roots in the late 18th century and continuing into the 19th century, during which the Albanian people gathered spiritual and intellectual strength for an independent cultural and political life within an independent nation. Modern Albanian culture flourished too, especially Albanian literature and arts, and was frequently linked to the influences of the Romanticism and Enlightenment principles. Prior to the rise of nationalism, Ottoman authorities suppressed any expression of national unity or conscience by the Albanian people.
The victory of Russia over the Ottoman Empire following the Russian-Ottoman Wars resulted the execution of the Treaty of San Stefano which assigned Albanian-populated lands to their Slavic and Greek neighbours. However, the United Kingdom and Austro-Hungarian Empire consequently blocked the arrangement and caused the Treaty of Berlin. From this point, Albanians started to organise themselves with the goal to protect and unite the Albanian-populated lands into a unitary nation, leading to the formation of the League of Prizren. The league had initially the assistance of the Ottoman authorities whose position was based on the religious solidarity of Muslim people and landlords connected with the Ottoman administration. They favoured and protected the Muslim solidarity and called for defence of Muslim lands simultaneously constituting the reason for titling the league Committee of the Real Muslims.
Approximately 300 Muslims participated in the assembly composed by delegates from Bosnia, the administrator of the Sanjak of Prizren as representatives of the central authorities and no delegates from Vilayet of Scutari. Signed by only 47 Muslim deputies, the league issued the Kararname that contained a proclamation that the people from northern Albania, Epirus and Bosnia and Herzegovina are willing to defend the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire by all possible means against the troops of Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro.
Ottomans authorities cancelled their assistance when the league, under Abdyl Frashëri, became focused on working towards Albanian autonomy and requested merging four vilayets, including Kosovo, Shkodër, Monastir and Ioannina, into a unified vilayet, the Albanian Vilayet. The league used military force to prevent the annexing areas of Plav and Gusinje assigned to Montenegro. After several successful battles with Montenegrin troops, such as the Battle of Novšiće, the league was forced to retreat from their contested regions. The league was later defeated by the Ottoman army sent by the sultan.

Independence
Albania declared independence from the Ottoman Empire on 28 November 1912, accompanied by the establishment of the Senate and Government by the Assembly of Vlorë on 4 December 1912. Its sovereignty was recognised by the Conference of London. On 29 July 1913, the Treaty of London delineated the borders of the country and its neighbors, leaving many Albanians outside Albania, predominantly partitioned between Montenegro, Serbia, and Greece.
Headquartered in Vlorë, the International Commission of Control was established on 15 October 1913 to take care of the administration of Albania until its own political institutions were in order. The International Gendarmerie was established as the Principality of Albania's first law enforcement agency. In November, the first gendarmerie members arrived in the country. Prince of Albania Wilhelm of Wied (Princ Vilhelm Vidi) was selected as the first prince of the principality. On 7 March, he arrived in the provisional capital of Durrës and began to organise his government, appointing Turhan Pasha Përmeti to form the first Albanian cabinet.
In November 1913, the Albanian pro-Ottoman forces had offered the throne of Albania to the Ottoman war minister of Albanian origin, Ahmed Izzet Pasha. The pro-Ottoman peasants believed that the new regime was a tool of the six Christian Great Powers and local landowners, who owned half of the arable land.
In February 1914, the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus was proclaimed in Gjirokastër by the local Greek population against incorporation to Albania. This initiative was short-lived, and in 1921 the southern provinces were incorporated into the Albanian Principality. High-ranking Orthodox clergy were among the strongest opponents of the Albanian National Awakening. Reports from the period, including those from international observers, documented the burning of villages and civilian casualties. Nationalist Orthodox insurgents were accused of targeting Muslim Albanian populations to consolidate territorial claims for Greece. Meanwhile, the revolt of Albanian peasants against the new regime erupted under the leadership of the group of Muslim clerics gathered around Essad Pasha Toptani, who proclaimed himself the savior of Albania and Islam. To gain the support of the Mirdita Catholic volunteers from northern Albania, Prince Wied appointed their leader, Prênk Bibë Doda, foreign minister of the Principality of Albania. In May and June 1914, the International Gendarmerie was joined by Isa Boletini and his men, mostly from Kosovo, and the rebels defeated northern Mirdita Catholics, capturing most of Central Albania by the end of August 1914. Prince Wied's regime collapsed, and he left the country on 3 September 1914.

First Republic
The interwar period in Albania was marked by persistent economic and social difficulties, political instability and foreign interventions. After World War I, Albania lacked an established government and internationally recognised borders, rendering it vulnerable to neighboring entities such as Greece, Italy, and Yugoslavia, all of which sought to expand their influence. This led to political uncertainty, highlighted in 1918 when the Congress of Durrës sought Paris Peace Conference protection but was denied, further complicating Albania's position on the international stage. Territorial tensions escalated as Yugoslavia, particularly Serbia, sought control of northern Albania, while Greece aimed dominance in southern Albania. The situation deteriorated in 1919 when the Serbs launched attacks on Albanian inhabitants, among others in Gusinje and Plav, resulting in massacres and large-scale displacement. Meanwhile, Italian influence continued to expand during this time, driven by economic interests and political ambitions.
Fan Noli, renowned for his idealism, became prime minister in 1924, with a vision to institute a Western-style constitutional government, abolish feudalism, counter Italian influence, and enhance critical sectors, including infrastructure, education and healthcare. He faced resistance from former allies, who had assisted in the removal of Zog from power, and struggled to secure foreign aid to implement his agenda. Noli's decision to establish diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union, an adversary of the Serbian elite, ignited allegations of bolshevism from Belgrade. This in turn led to increased pressure from Italy and culminated in Zog's restoration to authority. In 1928, Zog transitioned Albania from a republic to a monarchy that garnered backing from Fascist Italy, with Zog assuming the title of King Zog I. Key constitutional changes dissolved the Senate and established a unicameral National Assembly while preserving Zog's authoritative powers.
In 1939, Italy under Benito Mussolini launched a military invasion of Albania, resulting in the exile of Zog and the creation of an Italian protectorate. As World War II progressed, Italy aimed to expand its territorial dominion in the Balkans, including territorial claims on regions of Greece (Chameria), Macedonia, Montenegro and Kosovo. These ambitions laid the foundation of Greater Albania, which aimed to unite all areas with Albanian-majority populations into a single country. In 1943, as Italy's control declined, Nazi Germany assumed control of Albania, subjecting Albanians to forced labour, economic exploitation and repression under German rule. This period saw the forced expulsion and massacres of the Cham Albanians, a predominantly Muslim group. The religious divide was used as a justification for violence, with some Orthodox locals reportedly identifying Muslim neighbors to paramilitary groups, leading to massacres and the forced expulsion of thousands. The tide shifted in 1944 when Albanian partisan forces, under the leadership of Enver Hoxha and other communist leaders, successfully liberated Albania from German occupation.

Socialist Republic
The establishment of the People's Republic of Albania under the leadership of Enver Hoxha was a significant epoch in modern Albanian history. Hoxha's regime embraced Marxist–Leninist ideologies and implemented authoritarian policies, including prohibition of religious practices, severe restrictions on travel, and abolition of private property rights. It was also defined by a persistent pattern of purges, extensive repression, instances of betrayal, and hostility to external influences. Any form of opposition or resistance to his rule was met with expeditious and severe consequences, such as internal exile, extended imprisonment, and execution. The regime confronted a multitude of challenges, including widespread poverty, illiteracy, health crises and gender inequality. In response, Hoxha initiated a modernisation initiative aimed at attaining economic and social liberation and transforming Albania into an industrial society. The regime placed a high priority on the diversification of the economy through Soviet-style industrialisation, comprehensive infrastructure development such as the introduction of a transformative railway system, expansion of education and healthcare services, elimination of adult illiteracy, and targeted advancements in areas such as women's rights.

Albania's diplomatic history under Hoxha was characterised by notable conflicts. Initially aligned with Yugoslavia as a satellite state, the relationship deteriorated as Yugoslavia aimed to incorporate Albania within its territory. Subsequently, Albania established relations with the Soviet Union and engaged trade agreements with other Eastern European countries, but experienced disagreements over Soviet policies, leading to strained ties with Moscow and diplomatic separation in 1961. Simultaneously, tensions with the West heightened due to Albania's refusal to hold free elections and allegations of Western support for anti-communist uprisings. Albania's enduring partnership was with China; it sided with Beijing during the Sino-Soviet conflict, resulting in severed ties with the Soviet Union and withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact in response to the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. But their relations stagnated in 1970, prompting both to reassess their commitment, and Albania actively reduced its dependence on China.
Under Hoxha's regime, Albania underwent a widespread campaign targeting religious clergy of various faiths, resulting in public persecution and executions, particularly targeting Muslims, Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox adherents. In 1946, religious estates underwent nationalisation, coinciding with the closure or transformation of religious institutions into various other purposes. This culminated in 1976, when Albania became the world's first constitutionally atheist state. Under this regime, citizens were forced to renounce their religious beliefs, adopt a secular way of life, and embrace socialist ideology.

Fourth Republic
After four decades of communism paired with the revolutions of 1989, Albania witnessed a notable rise in political activism, particularly among students, which led to a transformation in the prevailing order. After the first multi-party elections of 1991, the communist party maintained a stronghold in the parliament until its defeat in the parliamentary elections of 1992 directed by the Democratic Party. Considerable economic and financial resources were devoted to pyramid schemes that were widely supported by the government. The schemes swept up somewhere between one sixth and one third of the population of the country. Despite the International Monetary Fund's warnings, Sali Berisha defended the schemes as large investment firms, leading more people to redirect their remittances and sell their homes and cattle for cash to deposit in the schemes.
The schemes began to collapse in late 1996, leading many of the investors to join initially peaceful protests against the government, requesting their money back. The protests turned violent in February 1997 as government forces responded by firing on the demonstrators. In March, the Police and Republican Guard deserted, leaving their armories open. These were promptly emptied by militias and criminal gangs. The resulting civil war caused a wave of evacuations of foreign nationals and refugees.
The crisis led both Aleksandër Meksi and Sali Berisha to resign from office in the wake of the general election. In April 1997, Operation Alba, a U.N. peacekeeping force led by Italy, entered Albania with two goals: to assist with the evacuation of expatriates and secure the ground for international organisations. The main international organisation involved was the Western European Union's multinational Albanian Police element, which worked with the government to restructure the judicial system and simultaneously the Albanian police.

Contemporary
After the fall of the communist system, Albania pursued integration with Euro-Atlantic institutions. It formally applied for membership of the European Union on 28 April 2009 and joined NATO the same year. Albania was granted EU candidate status in June 2014, while accession negotiations began with the first intergovernmental conference in July 2022. Albania opened negotiations on the fundamentals cluster in October 2024 and, by late 2025, had opened all negotiating clusters, a development described by the European Commission as a significant milestone in the accession process.
The 2013 Albanian parliamentary election ended eight years of Democratic Party rule under Sali Berisha. The Socialist Party, led by Edi Rama, won the election as the main force of the Alliance for a European Albania, with the Socialist Movement for Integration as a coalition partner. Rama's governments promoted judicial reform, public administration changes, urban redevelopment, digitalisation of public services, tourism development and EU accession as central priorities. A major justice reform package adopted in 2016 created new institutions including the Special Structure against Corruption and Organized Crime (SPAK), which later became central to the prosecution of high-level corruption and organised crime cases.
At the same time, Rama's long tenure became increasingly controversial. The Socialist Party won the 2017, 2021 and 2025 parliamentary elections, making Rama the first Albanian prime minister to secure four consecutive mandates. His dominance was accompanied by persistent criticism from opposition parties, civil society and international monitors over corruption, weak checks and balances, state capture, media pressure and the use of state resources in elections. Freedom House has classified Albania as "Partly Free" and as a "Transitional or Hybrid Regime", while noting that elections are competitive but that politics is highly polarised, organised around dominant personalities, and affected by corruption and bribery. Freedom House's Nations in Transit assessment described Albania's national governance as democratic but dominated by clientelist party politics and individual personalities, and stated that elections were frequently marred by vote-buying, manipulation, fraud and gerrymandering.
Concerns about state capture also became a recurring theme in assessments of Albania. In 2021, Transparency International and the Institute for Democracy and Mediation published Deconstructing State Capture in Albania, a report examining grand corruption cases and "tailor-made laws" from 2008 to 2020. The report argued that state-capture mechanisms in Albania involved clientelist networks, corruption in the judiciary and laws designed to benefit particular private interests. The Bertelsmann Transformation Index reported in 2026 that political and patronage networks continued to undermine meritocracy and bureaucratic expertise, and that high-level corruption investigations had revealed the role of networks that diverted state contracts and resources toward political associates, connected businesses, family members and criminal networks.
Electoral integrity remained disputed during Rama's later terms. The OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights stated that the 2025 Albanian parliamentary election was competitive and professionally managed, but that it took place in a highly polarised environment and contestants did not enjoy a level playing field. The final report cited reports of intimidation, misuse of public resources and pressure on public employees, which undermined equal opportunities. Reuters reported that the 2025 campaign was dominated by Rama's promise to secure EU membership by 2030 and by accusations of widespread corruption, while critics argued that he had concentrated too much power. After the election, Rama began his fourth term in September 2025 and declared EU membership by 2030 the central goal of his mandate.
The consolidation of Rama's rule coincided with a wave of investigations by SPAK against high-ranking figures from both the governing majority and the opposition. Former prime minister Sali Berisha was indicted on corruption charges in 2024, former president Ilir Meta was arrested and later charged in a corruption and money-laundering case, and Tirana mayor Erion Veliaj, a senior Socialist Party figure, was detained in 2025 on corruption and money-laundering allegations, which he denied. Deputy prime minister and infrastructure minister Belinda Balluku was later investigated over public-tender allegations, denied wrongdoing, and was dismissed by Rama in February 2026 as the case intensified. European Union officials praised SPAK's work as central to rule-of-law reform, while also warning that Albania's EU progress depended on judicial independence and credible anti-corruption results.
On 26 November 2019, a 6.4 magnitude earthquake struck Albania, with the epicentre about 16 km (10 mi) southwest of Mamurras. The tremor was felt in Tirana and in places as far away as Taranto, Italy, and Belgrade, Serbia, while the most affected areas were Durrës and Kodër-Thumanë. The response included humanitarian aid from the Albanian diaspora and several foreign governments. On 9 March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed to have spread to Albania.
In 2026, large anti-government demonstrations known as the Flamingo Revolution emerged after proposed luxury coastal developments on Sazan Island and the Zvërnec peninsula, including projects linked to Jared Kushner, became a focus of environmental and anti-corruption protests. Demonstrators accused Rama's government of lacking transparency, endangering protected ecosystems and failing to tackle corruption or improve public services. The protests, initially centred on environmental protection, expanded into broader demands for government accountability, early elections and Rama's resignation. European Parliament figures also warned that the coastal-development plans could affect Albania's EU accession process if they conflicted with environmental obligations and democratic standards.

Geography
Albania lies along the Mediterranean Sea on the Balkan Peninsula in South and Southeast Europe, and has an area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi). It is bordered by the Adriatic Sea to the west, Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east, Greece to the south, and the Ionian Sea to the southwest. It is between latitudes 42° and 39° N and longitudes 21° and 19° E. Geographic coordinates include Vërmosh at 42° 35' 34" northern latitude as the northernmost point, Konispol at 39° 40' 0" northern latitude as the southernmost, Sazan at 19° 16' 50" eastern longitude as the westernmost, and Vërnik at 21° 1' 26" eastern longitude as the easternmost. Mount Korab, rising at 2,764 m (9,068.24 ft) above the Adriatic, is the highest point, while the Mediterranean Sea, at 0 m (0.00 ft), is the lowest. The country extends 148 km (92 mi) from east to west and around 340 km (211 mi) from north to south.
Albania has a diverse and varied landscape with mountains and hills that traverse its territory in various directions. The country is home to extensive mountain ranges, including the Albanian Alps in the north, the Korab Mountains in the east, the Pindus Mountains in the southeast, the Ceraunian Mountains in the southwest, and the Skanderbeg Mountains in the centre. In the northwest is the Lake of Shkodër, Southern Europe's largest lake. Towards the southeast emerges the Lake of Ohrid, one of the world's oldest continuously existing lakes. Farther south, the expanse includes the Large and Small Lake of Prespa, some of the Balkans' highest lakes. Rivers rise mostly in the east and discharge into the Adriatic and Ionian Seas. The country's longest river, measured from mouth to source, is the Drin, which starts at the confluence of its two headwaters, the Black and White Drin. Of particular concern is the Vjosë, one of Europe's last intact large river systems.
In Albania forest cover is around 29.% of the total land area, equivalent to 788,900 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 788,800 hectares (ha) in 1990. Of the naturally regenerating forest 11% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 0% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 97% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 3% private ownership and 0% with ownership listed as other or unknown.

Climate
The climate of Albania exhibits a distinguished level of variability and diversity due to the differences in latitude, longitude and altitude. Albania experiences a Mediterranean and Continental climate, characterised by the presence of four distinct seasons. According to the Köppen classification, Albania encompasses five primary climatic types, spanning from Mediterranean and subtropical in the western half to oceanic, continental and subarctic in the eastern half of the country. The coastal regions along the Adriatic and Ionian Seas in Albania are acknowledged as the warmest areas, while the northern and eastern regions encompassing the Albanian Alps and the Korab Mountains are recognised as the coldest areas in the country. Throughout the year, the average monthly temperatures fluctuate, ranging from −1 °C (30 °F) during the winter months to 21.8 °C (71.2 °F) in the summer months. Notably, the highest recorded temperature of 43.9 °C (111.0 °F) was observed in Kuçovë on 18 July 1973, while the lowest temperature of −29 °C (−20 °F) was recorded in Shtyllë, Librazhd on 9 January 2017.
Albania receives most of the precipitation in winter months and less in summer months. The average precipitation is about 1,485 millimetres (58.5 inches). The mean annual precipitation ranges between 600 and 3,000 millimetres (24 and 118 inches) depending on geographical location. The northwestern and southeastern highlands receive the intenser amount of precipitation, whilst the northeastern and southwestern highlands as well as the Western Lowlands the more limited amount. The Albanian Alps in the far north of the country are considered to be among the most humid regions of Europe, receiving at least 3,100 mm (122.0 in) of rain annually. Four glaciers within these mountains were discovered at a relatively low altitude of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft), which is extremely rare for such a southerly latitude.

Biodiversity
A biodiversity hotspot, Albania possesses an exceptionally rich and contrasting biodiversity on account of its geographical location at the centre of the Mediterranean Sea and the great diversity in its climatic, geological and hydrological conditions. Because of remoteness, the mountains and hills of Albania are endowed with forests, trees and grasses that are essential to the lives for a wide variety of animals, among others for two of the most endangered species of the country, the lynx and brown bear, as well as the wildcat, grey wolf, red fox, golden jackal, Egyptian vulture and golden eagle, the latter constituting the national animal of the country.
The estuaries, wetlands and lakes are extraordinarily important for the greater flamingo, pygmy cormorant and the extremely rare and perhaps the most iconic bird of the country, the dalmatian pelican. Of particular importance are the Mediterranean monk seal, loggerhead sea turtle and green sea turtle that use to nest on the country's coastal waters and shores.
In terms of phytogeography, Albania is part of the Boreal Kingdom and stretches specifically within the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal and Mediterranean Region. Its territory can be subdivided into four terrestrial ecoregions of the Palearctic realm namely within the Illyrian deciduous forests, Balkan mixed forests, Pindus Mountains mixed forests and Dinaric Mountains mixed forests.
Approximately 3,500 different species of plants can be found in Albania which refers principally to a Mediterranean and Eurasian character. The country maintains a vibrant tradition of herbal and medicinal practices. At the minimum 300 plants growing locally are used in the preparation of herbs and medicines. The trees within the forests are primarily fir, oak, beech and pine.

Conservation
Albania has been an active participant in numerous international agreements and conventions aimed at strengthing its commitment to the preservation and sustainable management of biological diversity. Since 1994, the country is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and its associated Cartagena and Nagoya Protocols. To uphold these commitments, it has developed and implemented a comprehensive National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP). Furthermore, Albania has established a partnership with the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), advancing its conservation efforts on both national and international scales. Guided by the IUCN, the country has made substantial progress in the foundation of protected areas within its boundaries, encompassing 12 national parks among others Butrint, Karaburun-Sazan, Llogara, Prespa and Vjosa.
As a signatory to the Ramsar Convention, Albania has granted special recognition upon four wetlands, designating them as Wetlands of International Importance, including Buna-Shkodër, Butrint, Karavasta and Prespa. The country's dedication to protection extends further into the sphere of UNESCO's World Network of Biosphere Reserves, operating within the framework of the Man and the Biosphere Programme, evidenced by its engagement in the Ohrid-Prespa Transboundary Biosphere Reserve. Furthermore, Albania is host to two natural World Heritage Sites, which encompass the Ohrid region and both the Gashi River and Rrajca as part of Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe.

Protected areas
The protected areas of Albania are areas designated and managed by the Albanian government. There are 12 national parks, 4 ramsar sites, 1 biosphere reserve and 786 other types of conservation reserves in Albania. Located in the north, the Albanian Alps National Park, comprising the former Theth National Park and Valbonë Valley National Park, is surrounded amidst the towering peaks of the Albanian Alps. In the east, portions of the rugged Korab, Nemërçka and Shebenik Mountains are conserved within the boundaries of Fir of Hotovë-Dangëlli National Park, Shebenik National Park and Prespa National Park, with the latter encompassing Albania's share of the Great and Small Lakes of Prespa.
To the south, the Ceraunian Mountains define the Albanian Ionian Sea Coast, shaping the landscape of Llogara National Park, which extends into the Karaburun Peninsula, forming the Karaburun-Sazan Marine Park. Further southward lies Butrint National Park, occupying a peninsula surrounded by the Lake of Butrint and the Channel of Vivari. In the west, stretching along the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast, the Divjakë-Karavasta National Park boasts the extensive Lagoon of Karavasta, one of the largest lagoon systems in the Mediterranean Sea. Notably, Europe's first wild river national park, Vjosa National Park, safeguards the Vjosa River and its primary tributaries, which originates in the Pindus Mountains and flows to the Adriatic Sea. Dajti Mountain National Park, Lurë-Dejë Mountain National Park and Tomorr Mountain National Park protect the mountainous terrain of the centre of Albania, including the Tomorr and Skanderbeg Mountains.

Environmental issues
Environmental issues in Albania notably encompass air and water pollution, climate change impacts, waste management shortcomings, biodiversity loss and imperative for nature conservation. Climate change is predicted to exert significant impacts on the quality of life in Albania. Albania is one of the European countries most at risk and vulnerable to natural disasters. Natural disasters, such as floods, forest fires, and landslides, are increasing in Albania due to climate change, causing significant damage. Rising sea levels are anticipated to negatively impact coastal communities and the tourism industry.
In 2023 Albania emitted 7.67 million tonnes of greenhouse gases, equivalent to 2.73 tonnes per person, making it a relatively low emitting country. Albania has pledged a 20.9% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030, and net zero by 2050. The country has a moderate and improving performance in the Environmental Performance Index with an overall ranking of 62 out of 180 countries in 2022. However, Albania's ranking has decreased since its highest placement at position 15 in the Environmental Performance Index of 2012.

Politics
Since declaring independence in 1912, Albania has experienced a significant political transformation, traversing through distinct periods that included a monarchical rule, a communist regime and the eventual establishment of a democratic order. In 1998, Albania transitioned into a sovereign parliamentary constitutional republic, marking a fundamental milestone in its political evolution. Its governance structure operates under a constitution that serves as the principal document of the country. The constitution is grounded in the principle of the separation of powers, with three arms of government that encompass the legislative embodied in the Parliament, the executive led by the President as the ceremonial head of state and the Prime Minister as the functional head of government, and the judiciary with a hierarchy of courts, including the constitutional and supreme courts as well as multiple appeal and administrative courts.
Albania's legal system is structured to protect its people's political rights, regardless of their ethnic, linguistic, racial, or religious affiliations. Despite these principles, there are significant human rights concerns in Albania that demand attention. These concerns include issues related to the independence of the judiciary, the absence of a free media sector and the enduring problem of corruption within various governmental bodies, law enforcement agencies and other institutions. As Albania pursues its path towards EU membership, active efforts are being made to achieve substantial improvements in these areas to align with EU criteria and standards.

Political situation
Since Edi Rama and the Socialist Party of Albania came to power in 2013, Albania has experienced an unprecedented concentration of executive power, with the Socialist Party winning four consecutive parliamentary elections in 2013, 2017, 2021 and 2025. Supporters credit Rama's governments with accelerating European Union accession negotiations, implementing the 2016 justice reform, expanding digital public services, improving infrastructure and increasing tourism.
At the same time, Rama's prolonged tenure has generated sustained domestic and international criticism. Opposition parties, civil society organisations and a number of analysts have argued that Albania has experienced significant democratic backsliding characterised by increasing executive dominance, weakened institutional checks and balances, clientelist governance and extensive political patronage.
Freedom House describes Albania as a "Partly Free" country and notes that politics is dominated by powerful party leaders, while corruption remains a persistent challenge. Its Nations in Transit report characterises Albania's national governance as being dominated by clientelist party politics and states that elections continue to be affected by vote-buying, manipulation, fraud and gerrymandering.
Concerns regarding state capture have also featured prominently in assessments of Albania's political system. In 2021, Transparency International and the Institute for Democracy and Mediation published Deconstructing State Capture in Albania, arguing that grand corruption, clientelist networks, judicial weaknesses and tailor-made legislation had enabled state-capture mechanisms affecting governance and public institutions.
Electoral integrity has remained a contentious issue. Following the 2025 Albanian parliamentary election, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights concluded that the election was competitive and professionally managed, but found that it was held in a highly polarised environment without a level playing field. The observation mission reported misuse of public resources, pressure on public employees, intimidation allegations and unequal campaign conditions that undermined equal opportunities among contestants.
The expansion of the Special Structure against Corruption and Organized Crime (SPAK) has led to investigations and prosecutions involving senior politicians from both the governing majority and the opposition, including former prime minister Sali Berisha, former president Ilir Meta, Tirana mayor Erion Veliaj and other senior officials. The European Commission has generally praised SPAK's work while continuing to stress that corruption remains prevalent in many sectors and that judicial independence must be protected from political pressure.
During Rama's fourth term, anti-government demonstrations intensified. Beginning in late 2025 and expanding further during the Flamingo Revolution in 2026, protesters accused the government of systemic corruption, lack of transparency, misuse of public resources and favouring politically connected business interests. The protests, initially triggered by opposition to coastal development projects, evolved into broader demands for democratic reform, government accountability and Rama's resignation.
Human rights protections are guaranteed by the Constitution regardless of ethnicity, language, race or religion. Nevertheless, international organisations continue to identify concerns regarding judicial independence, corruption, media pluralism and political influence over state institutions, while noting that progress in these areas remains closely linked to Albania's European Union accession process.

Human rights
Human rights in Albania are formally protected by the Constitution of Albania, which guarantees equality before the law, freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, religious freedom and protection from discrimination. International assessments generally describe Albania as a competitive but weakened democracy, with persistent problems involving corruption, political pressure on institutions, media freedom, gender-based violence, prison conditions and discrimination against vulnerable groups.
During the long premiership of Edi Rama, whose Socialist Party of Albania has governed since 2013, human-rights concerns have often been linked to broader criticism of democratic backsliding, concentration of executive power, clientelist party politics and weak institutional checks. Freedom House classifies Albania as "Partly Free" and states that corruption and bribery remain major problems, while its Nations in Transit assessment describes national governance as dominated by clientelist party politics and individual personalities. Opposition parties and critics have characterised Rama's rule as increasingly authoritarian, while the government and its supporters point to judicial reform, European Union accession progress and the work of anti-corruption institutions as evidence of democratic consolidation.
Freedom of expression and media independence remain major concerns. The United States Department of State's 2024 human-rights report identified serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including journalist self-censorship, threats and smear campaigns against journalists reporting on alleged corruption. Reporters Without Borders has stated that journalists in Albania face political pressure, especially during elections, as well as pressure from media owners and economic insecurity. In the 2026 World Press Freedom Index, Albania ranked 83rd of 180 countries, with media-rights groups noting continued structural problems affecting editorial independence and journalist safety.
Freedom of assembly is generally recognised, but protest policing has drawn attention during periods of political unrest. In 2026, police used tear gas, pepper spray and water cannon during anti-government demonstrations in Tirana connected to corruption allegations and the Flamingo Revolution, a protest movement that began over coastal development plans and expanded into wider demands for transparency, environmental protection and government accountability. Authorities said the police response followed attacks on officers and damage to property, while protesters and opposition figures accused the government of using force to suppress dissent.
Corruption also has direct implications for human rights and public trust in institutions. International reports have repeatedly identified corruption in government, law enforcement, the judiciary and local administration as a major problem. In 2021, Transparency International and the Institute for Democracy and Mediation argued that Albania showed signs of state capture through grand corruption, clientelist networks and tailor-made laws benefiting private interests. The creation of the Special Structure against Corruption and Organized Crime (SPAK) has led to high-level corruption investigations against figures from both government and opposition, but European Union reports continue to state that corruption remains widespread and that judicial independence must be protected from political pressure.
Conditions in prisons and detention facilities have remained a human-rights concern. Amnesty International reported that people in prisons experienced overcrowding and inadequate healthcare, while the Council of Europe and Albanian authorities have identified prison reform and protection of prisoners' rights as continuing priorities. Civil-society submissions to the UN Committee against Torture have also raised concerns about overcrowding, poor detention conditions, limited access to legal representation and insufficient investigation of abuse allegations.
Violence against women and girls remains widespread. Nearly 60% of women in rural areas suffer physical or psychological violence and nearly 8% are victims of sexual violence. Protection orders are often violated. In 2014 the Albanian Helsinki Committee (AHC) reported that the number of female murder victims remained high. The Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination has raised concerns regarding the family registration law that discriminates against women. As a result, heads of households, who are overwhelmingly men, have the right to change family residency without their partners' permission. In 2024, the Council of Europe's GREVIO monitoring body reported progress in Albania's framework against violence against women, but said serious gaps remained, including persistent gender stereotypes, extremely low reporting of sexual violence and limited specialist services. In 2026, the United Nations in Albania welcomed the adoption of a new law on prevention and protection from violence against women and domestic violence.
Roma, Balkan Egyptian and other minority communities continue to face barriers in education, housing, employment and access to public services. In 2024, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination reviewed Albania's implementation of anti-discrimination obligations and discussed the situation of Roma and Egyptian communities, including education, legal aid and hate-speech monitoring.
Albania has legal protections against discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, and LGBT organisations hold public events such as Tirana Pride. In 2015, ILGA-Europe ranked Albania 19th in terms of LGBT rights out of 49 observed European countries. In the 2022 Rainbow Europe report, lack of progress caused Albania to be ranked 28th among 49 countries. ILGA-Europe's later country reporting continued to identify discrimination and unsafe school environments for LGBTI people, with a 2024–2025 nationwide survey by Aleanca LGBTI reporting that most respondents viewed schools as unsafe for marginalised groups, including LGBTI students.

Foreign relations
Emerging from decades of isolation following the fall of communism, Albania has adopted a foreign policy orientation centred on active cooperation and engagement in international affairs. At the core of Albania's foreign policies lie a set of objectives, which encompass the commitment to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity, the cultivation of diplomatic ties with other countries, advocating for international recognition of Kosovo, addressing the concerns related to the expulsion of Cham Albanians, pursuing Euro-Atlantic integration and protecting the rights of the Albanians in Kosovo, Greece, Italy, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and the diaspora.
The external affairs of Albania underscore the country's dedication to regional stability and integration into major international institutions. Albania became a member of the United Nations (UN) in 1955, shortly after emerging from a period of isolation during the communist era. The country reached a major achievement in its foreign policy by securing NATO membership in 2009. Since obtaining candidate status in 2014, the country has also embarked on a comprehensive reform agenda to align itself with European Union (EU) accession standards, with the objective of becoming an EU member state.
Albania and Kosovo maintain a fraternal relationship strengthened by their substantial cultural, ethnical and historical ties. Both countries foster enduring diplomatic ties, with Albania actively supporting Kosovo's development and international integration efforts. Its fundamental contribution to Kosovo's path to independence is underscored by its early recognition of Kosovo's sovereignty in 2008. Furthermore, both governments hold annual joint meetings, displayed by the inaugural meeting in 2014, which serves as an official platform to enhance bilateral cooperation and reinforce their joint commitment to policies that promote the stability and prosperity of the broader Albanian region.

Military
The Albanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air and Naval Forces and constitute the military and paramilitary forces of the country. They are led by a commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defence and by the President as the supreme commander during wartime. However, in times of peace its powers are executed through the Prime Minister and the Defence Minister.
The chief purpose of the armed forces of Albania is the defence of the independence, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the country, as well as the participation in humanitarian, combat, non-combat and peace support operations. Military service is voluntary since 2010 with the age of 19 being the legal minimum age for the duty.
Albania has committed to increase the participations in multinational operations. Since the fall of communism, the country has participated in six international missions but only one United Nations mission in Georgia, where it sent three military observers. Since February 2008, Albania has participated officially in NATO's Operation Active Endeavor in the Mediterranean Sea. It was invited to join NATO on 3 April 2008, and it became a full member on 2 April 2009.
Albania reduced the number of active troops from 65,000 in 1988 to 14,500 in 2009. The military now consists mainly of a small fleet of aircraft and sea vessels. Increasing the military budget was one of the most important conditions for NATO integration. As of 1996 military spending was an estimated 1.5% of the country's GDP, only to peak in 2009 at 2% and fall again to 1.5%.

Administrative divisions
Albania is defined within a territorial area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi) in the Balkan Peninsula. It is informally divided into three regions, the Northern, Central and Southern Regions. Since its Declaration of Independence in 1912, Albania has reformed its internal organisation 21 times. Presently, the primary administrative units are the twelve constituent counties (qarqe/qarqet), which hold equal status under the law. Counties had previously been used in the 1950s and were recreated on 31 July 2000 to unify the 36 districts (rrathë/rrathët) of that time. The largest county in Albania by population is Tirana County with over 800,000 people. The smallest county, by population, is Gjirokastër County with over 70,000 people. The largest county, by area, is Korçë County encompassing 3,711 square kilometres (1,433 sq mi) of the southeast of Albania. The smallest county, by area, is Durrës County with an area of 766 square kilometres (296 sq mi) in the west of Albania.
The counties are made up of 61 second-level divisions known as municipalities (bashki/bashkia). The municipalities are the first level of local governance, responsible for local needs and law enforcement. They unified and simplified the previous system of urban and rural municipalities or communes (komuna/komunat) in 2015. For smaller issues of local government, the municipalities are organised into 373 administrative units (njësia/njësitë administrative). There are also 2980 villages (fshatra/fshatrat), neighborhoods or wards (lagje/lagjet), and localities (lokalitete/lokalitetet) previously used as administrative units.

Economy
Transitioning from a socialist planned to a capitalist mixed economy, Albania is classified as a developing open market with an upper-middle income status. The Albanian economy is characterised by a substantial service sector, comprising 48.6% of GDP, with key contributions from wholesale and retail trade, tourism, real estate, and logistics. Following this, the industrial sector accounts for 20.2%, particularly influenced by construction, while the agricultural sector, including forestry, and fisheries, represents 18.5%, and the manufacturing sector contributes a modest 6.3% to the economy. As of 2025, Albania's nominal gross domestic product (GDP) is reported at $26.911 billion with a GDP per capita of $9,474. The projected annual percentage change in economic growth for 2025 is 3.8%, with a forecasted moderation to 3.5% by 2029.
Albania has developed a comprehensive framework for international trade through several pivotal agreements with various regions. The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the European Union (EU), signed in 2006, is one of the most significant. This agreement provides critical trade benefits and serves as a foundation for the Albanian integration into the EU. In 2009, Albania signed a free trade agreement (FTA) with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which further expands trade opportunities and market access. The country is also a signatory to the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) and Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC), promoting regional trade and collaboration with neighboring countries. Furthermore, the country has enhanced its bilateral trade relations through a FTA with Turkey, the United Kingdom and a bilateral investment treaty with the United States.
The 2023 Economic Freedom of the World report placed Albania in the 31st position, noting a considerable degree of economic independence and the effective adoption of market-oriented policies. The 2024 Bertelsmann Transformation Index ranked Albania 20th and acknowledged substantial progress in political and economic transformation. Also in 2024, the country was positioned 23rd in the Global Gender Gap Index, excelling in the Economic Participation and Opportunity category with a global ranking of 16th, showcasing significant advancements in women's economic participation. However, the Albanian economy, despite demonstrating considerable resilience, encounters substantial vulnerabilities that hinder its development. Principal challenges include widespread corruption, distorted competition, and frequent modifications to fiscal legislation. Furthermore, inadequate contract enforcement, a large informal sector, and persistent labor shortages further complicate the national economic progress.
Economic landscape of Albania is characterised by regional disparities, particularly apparent in the concentration of economic activities in the triangular region formed by Tirana, Durrës and Laç. This metropolitan area, referred to as Durana, functions as the principal economic center of Albania. In the year 2021, Tirana County accounted for a significant 44% of the national GDP, with the counties of Fier and Durrës also playing integral roles in the economy, contributing 11% and 10% to the GDP, respectively. Other substantial economic centers, such as Elbasan and the coastal cities of Sarandë and Vlorë, highlight the uneven distribution of economic development across the country. Cultural regions, including Berat and Korçë, despite their geographical distance from the primary economic hubs, have derived considerable benefits from the expansion of the tourism sector.
Concerns over illicit finance, money laundering and organised-crime influence have become increasingly prominent in assessments of Albania's economy. The United States Department of State has identified Albania as vulnerable to money laundering, with criminal proceeds laundered through real estate purchases, construction projects, virtual assets and business development. Its 2025 Investment Climate Statement also described Albania's economic development as vulnerable because of widespread corruption, organised crime, distorted competition, labour shortages, low productivity and a large informal sector.
The Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime's 2025 Global Organized Crime Index described Albania as a prominent destination for money laundering, stating that criminal organisations exploit the real estate, tourism and construction sectors to legitimise illicit profits. It also reported that the construction sector is heavily infiltrated by illicit funds, distorting the market, and that corruption within political and law-enforcement institutions continues to facilitate organised crime. Critics of Prime Minister Edi Rama's economic model have connected these concerns to the rapid expansion of construction, real estate and luxury tourism during his long tenure, arguing that state-backed development projects and weak safeguards have allowed politically connected business interests and illicit capital to gain influence. The government has generally rejected accusations of political protection for organised crime and has pointed to justice reform, anti-money-laundering measures and investigations by the Special Structure against Corruption and Organized Crime as evidence of progress.

Primary sector
Albania produces significant amounts of fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, apricots, peaches, cherries, figs, sour cherries, plums, and strawberries), vegetables (potatoes, tomatoes, maize, onions, and wheat), sugar beets, tobacco, meat, honey, dairy products, traditional medicine and aromatic plants. Further, the country is a worldwide significant producer of salvia, rosemary and yellow gentian. The country's proximity to the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea give the underdeveloped fishing industry great potential. The World Bank and European Community economists report that, Albania's fishing industry has good potential to generate export earnings because prices in the nearby Greek and Italian markets are many times higher than those in the Albanian market. The fish available off the coasts of the country are carp, trout, sea bream, mussels and crustaceans.
Albania has one of Europe's longest histories of viticulture. Today's region was one of the few places where vine was naturally grown during the ice age. The oldest found seeds in the region are 4,000 to 6,000 years old. In 2009, the nation produced an estimated 17,500 tonnes of wine.

Secondary sector
Albania's secondary sector has undergone many changes and diversification since the communist regime collapsed. It is very diversified, from electronics, manufacturing, textiles, to food, cement, mining, and energy. The Antea Cement plant in Fushë-Krujë is considered one of the nation's largest industrial greenfield investments. Albanian oil and gas is one of the most promising, albeit strictly regulated, sectors of its economy. Albania has the second-largest oil deposits in the Balkan peninsula after Romania, and the largest oil reserves in Europe. The Albpetrol company is owned by the Albanian state and monitors the state petroleum agreements in the country. The textile industry has seen an extensive expansion by approaching companies from the European Union (EU) in Albania. According to the Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT), as of 2016, textile production had an annual growth of 5.3% and an annual turnover of around 1.5 billion euros.
Albania is a significant minerals producer and ranks among the world's leading chromium producers and exporters. The nation is also a notable producer of copper, nickel, and coal. The Batra mine, Bulqizë mine, and Thekna mine are among the most recognised Albanian mines still in operation.

Tertiary sector
The tertiary sector represents the fastest growing sector of the country's economy. 36% of the population work in the service sector which contributes to 65% of the country's GDP. Ever since the end of the 20th century, the banking industry is a major component of the tertiary sector and remains in good conditions overall due to privatisation and the commendable monetary policy.
Previously one of the most isolated and controlled countries in the world, telecommunication industry represents nowadays another major contributor to the sector. It developed largely through privatisation and subsequent investment by both domestic and foreign investors. Eagle, Vodafone and Telekom Albania are the leading telecommunications service providers in the country.
Tourism is recognised as an industry of national importance and has been steadily increasing since the beginnings of the 21st century. It directly accounted for 8.4% of GDP in 2016 though including indirect contributions pushes the proportion to 26%. In the same year, the country received approximately 4.74 million visitors mostly from across Europe and the United States as well.
The increase of foreign visitors has been dramatic. Albania had only 500,000 visitors in 2005, and an estimated 4.2 million in 2012, an increase of 740 percent. According to the United Nations World Tourism Organization (UN Tourism), Albania welcomed approximately 11.7 million tourists in 2024, marking a significant increase from previous years.
The bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic and Ionian Sea in the west of the country. But the Albanian Riviera in the southwest has the most scenic and pristine beaches; its coastline has a considerable length of 446 kilometres (277 miles). The coast has a distinctive character, rich in varieties of virgin beaches, capes, coves, covered bays, lagoons, small gravel beaches, sea caves, and many landforms. Some parts of this seaside are very clean ecologically, including unexplored areas, which are very rare within the Mediterranean. Other attractions include the mountainous areas such as the Albanian Alps, Ceraunian Mountains and Korab Mountains but also the historical cities of Berat, Durrës, Gjirokastër, Sarandë, Shkodër and Korçë.

Transport
Transportation in Albania is managed within the functions of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy and entities such as the Albanian Road Authority (ARRSH), responsible for the construction and maintenance of the highways and motorways in Albania, as well as the Albanian Aviation Authority (AAC), with the responsibility of coordinating civil aviation and airports in the country.
The international airport of Tirana is the premier air gateway to the country, and is also the principal hub for Albania's national flag carrier airline, Air Albania. The airport carried more than 3.3 million passengers in 2019 with connections to many destinations in other countries around Europe, Africa and Asia. The country plans to progressively increase the number of airports especially in the south with possible locations in Sarandë, Gjirokastër and Vlorë.
The highways and motorways in Albania are properly maintained and often still under construction and renovation. The Autostrada 1 (A1) is an integral transportation corridor and the country's longest motorway. It is planned to link Durrës on the Adriatic Sea across Pristina in Kosovo with the Pan-European Corridor X in Serbia. The Autostrada 2 (A2) is part of the Adriatic–Ionian Corridor as well as the Pan-European Corridor VIII and connects Fier with Vlorë. The Autostrada 3 (A3) is under construction and after its completion will connect Tirana and Elbasan with the Pan-European Corridor VIII. When all three corridors are completed, Albania will have an estimated 759 kilometres (472 mi) of highway, linking it with all neighboring countries.
Durrës is the busiest and largest seaport in the country, followed by Vlorë, Shëngjin and Sarandë. The rail network is administered by the national railway company Hekurudha Shqiptare. A new railway line from Tirana and its airport to Durrës is planned. The location of this railway, connecting Albania's most populated urban areas, makes it an important economic development project.

Energy
Due to its location and natural resources, Albania has a wide variety of energy resources, ranging from gas, oil, and coal to wind, solar, water, and other renewable sources. According to the World Economic Forum's 2023 Energy Transition Index (ETI), the country ranked 21st globally, highlighting the progress in its energy transition agenda. Currently, Albania's electricity generation sector depends on hydroelectricity, ranking fifth in the world in percentage terms. Increasing risks of river floods and droughts due to climate change is expected to put electricity generation at risk. The Drin, in the north, hosts four hydroelectric power stations, including Fierza, Koman, Skavica and Vau i Dejës. Two other power stations, such as the Banjë and Moglicë, are along the Devoll in the south.
Albania has considerable oil deposits. It has the 10th-largest oil reserves in Europe and the 58th in the world. The country's main petroleum deposits are located around the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast and Myzeqe Plain within the Western Lowlands, where the country's largest reserve is located. Patos-Marinza, also located within the area, is the largest onshore oil field in Europe. The Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP), part of the planned Southern Gas Corridor, runs for 215 kilometres (134 miles) across Albania's territory before entering the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast approximately 17 kilometres (11 miles) northwest of Fier.
Albania's water resources are particularly abundant in all the regions of the country and comprise lakes, rivers, springs, and groundwater aquifers. The country's available average quantity of fresh water is estimated at 129.7 cubic metres (4,580 cubic feet) per inhabitant per year, one of the highest rates in Europe. According to data presented by the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP) in 2015, about 93% of the country's total population had access to improved sanitation.

Media
The freedom of press and freedom of speech, and the right to free expression are guaranteed by the Constitution of Albania. In practice, however, media freedom has been weakened by political pressure, concentrated ownership, opaque financing, intimidation of journalists and the overlap between media, business and political interests.
Albania ranked 84th in the World Press Freedom Index of 2020 compiled by Reporters Without Borders. Reporters Without Borders has continued to describe the Albanian media environment as fragile, stating that press freedom and media independence are threatened by conflicts of interest between business and politics, a flawed legal framework and partisan regulation. In 2026, Albania ranked 83rd of 180 countries in the World Press Freedom Index.
Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH) is the public broadcaster of Albania, operating television and radio stations throughout the country. The main private broadcasters include Top Channel, TV Klan, Vizion Plus, A2 CNN, Syri TV and Ora News. Albanian television content is also distributed in Kosovo and other Albanian-speaking territories.
Media ownership is highly concentrated. Reporters Without Borders states that the most influential private-sector media are owned by a small number of companies with links to the political world and to highly regulated sectors such as construction. The Media Freedom Rapid Response reported that the top four owners in the Albanian television market reach between 48.93% and 58.60% of audiences, and that the boundaries between media, politics and economics remain blurred. According to these assessments, media owners often use their outlets to protect business interests or influence governments and political parties, while state advertising and public funds are distributed in opaque ways that can create political dependence.
The media environment has become a central part of criticism of Prime Minister Edi Rama's long rule. International media-freedom organisations and Albanian journalists have accused the government of using communication centralisation, selective access, public-relations material and attacks on critical reporters to dominate the information space. Reporters Without Borders has stated that journalists face political pressure, especially during elections, and that politicians limit editorial independence by politicising regulators and the public broadcaster. The Media Freedom Rapid Response cited BIRN Albania editor Gjergj Erebara as saying that large parts of the Albanian media landscape operate under government propaganda and disinformation pressure.
Journalists who investigate corruption, organised crime or politically connected business interests face particular risks. Reporters Without Borders states that journalists investigating crime and corruption are frequent targets of threats and that self-censorship is widespread. It also reports that critical journalists are subjected to discrediting attacks by both government and opposition politicians, while organised crime remains a major threat to journalists' safety. In March 2023, the headquarters of Top Channel was attacked with automatic weapons, killing a security guard.
The public broadcaster has also been part of the debate over media capture and political pressure. In 2026, international media-freedom organisations warned that democratic reform of RTSH should not be carried out through funding cuts, suspension or closure, arguing that such measures would violate European standards for public service media.
Albanian cinema has its roots in the 20th century and developed after the country's declaration of independence. The first movie theater exclusively devoted to showing motion pictures was built in 1912 in Shkodër. During the People's Republic of Albania, Albanian cinema developed rapidly with the inauguration of the Kinostudio Shqipëria e Re in Tirana. In 1953, the Albanian-Soviet epic film The Great Warrior Skanderbeg was released, chronicling the life and fight of the medieval Albanian hero Skanderbeg. It went on to win an international prize at the 1954 Cannes Film Festival. In 2003, the Tirana International Film Festival was established, the largest film festival in the country. The Durrës Amphitheatre hosts the Durrës International Film Festival, the country's second largest film festival.

Technology
After the fall of communism in 1991, human resources in sciences and technology in Albania have drastically decreased. As of various reports, during 1991 to 2005 approximately 50% of the professors and scientists of the universities and science institutions in the country have left Albania. Albania was ranked 67th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. 
Telecommunication represents one of the fastest growing and dynamic sectors in Albania. Vodafone Albania, Telekom Albania and Albtelecom are the three large providers of mobile and internet in Albania. As of the Electronic and Postal Communications Authority (AKEP) in 2018, the country had approximately 2.7 million active mobile users with almost 1.8 million active broadband subscribers. Vodafone Albania alone served more than 931,000 mobile users, Telekom Albania had about 605,000 users and Albtelecom had more than 272,000 users. In January 2023, Albania launched its first two satellites, Albania 1 and Albania 2, into orbit, in what was regarded as a milestone effort in monitoring the country's territory and identifying illegal activities. Albanian-American engineer Mira Murati, the Chief Technology Officer of research organisation OpenAI, played a substantial role in the development and launch of artificial intelligence services such as ChatGPT, Codex and DALL-E. In December 2023, Prime Minister Edi Rama announced plans for collaboration between the Albanian government and ChatGPT, facilitated by discussions with Murati. Rama emphasised the intention to streamline the alignment of Albanian laws with the regulations of the European Union, aiming to reduce costs associated with translation and legal services.

Demographics
The demographic statistics of Albania, as revealed by the 2023 census conducted by the Instituti i Statistikave (INSTAT), indicated a population of 2,402,113, with a notable decline from the 2,821,977 recorded in the 2011 census. The decrease in inhabitants began after the disintegration of the communist regime in Albania and is associated with significant shifts within the political, economic, and social structure of Albania. A principal factor in this transition incorporates a decline in fertility rates coupled with an increase in emigration, both contributing to persistent demographic changes and challenges. It is forecast that the population will continue shrinking for the next decade at least, depending on the actual rates and the level of migration. Currently, the population density of Albania is measured at 83.6 inhabitants per square kilometer with a varied distribution of inhabitants across different regions. The counties of Tirana and Durrës showcase substantial concentrations of people, accounting for about 41% of the overall demographic of Albania, with 32% residing in Tirana and 9% in Durrës. Conversely, more peripheral and rural counties such as Gjirokastër and Kukës present significantly lower population densities, with each aiding 3% to the overall population.
Historically, the Albanian people have established several communities in many regions throughout Southern Europe. The Albanian diaspora has been formed since the late Middle Ages, when they emigrated to escape either various socio-political difficulties or the Ottoman conquest of Albania. Following the fall of communism, large numbers of Albanians have migrated to countries such as Australia, Canada, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Albanian minorities are present in the neighbouring territories such as the west of North Macedonia, the southeast of Montenegro, Kosovo in its entirety and parts of southern Serbia. Altogether, the number of ethnic Albanians living abroad is estimated to be higher than the total population inside Albania. As much as a third of those born in the country's borders now live outside of it, making Albania one of the countries with the highest rate of outmigration relative to its population in the world. In 2022 the birth rate was 20% lower than in 2021, largely due to emigration of people of childbearing age.

Urbanisation
Subsequent to the collapse of communism in 1991, Albania has undergone a remarkable transformation in its urban landscape, emerging as one of the fastest urbanising countries in Europe. At the forefront of this transformation is the Tirana–Durrës agglomeration, a densely populated urban corridor situated along the western coast of Albania. This corridor has become the primary locus of population growth and settlement development, attracting a significant influx of internal migrants from the country's peripheral areas. Despite an overall decline of the country's total population, the proportion of the urban demographic has consistently progressed from 47% in 2001 to 65% in 2023. This sustained increase, coupled with the concentration in the Tirana-Durrës region, has led to a spread of regional imbalances, with the peripheral areas, particularly Dibër and Kukës, experiencing severe depopulation.

Language
The official language of the country is Albanian which is spoken by the vast majority of the country's population. Its standard spoken and written form is revised and merged from the two main dialects, Gheg and Tosk, though it is notably based more on the Tosk dialect. The Shkumbin river is the rough dividing line between the two dialects. Among minority languages, Greek is the second most-spoken language in the country, with 0.5 to 3% of the population speaking it as first language, mainly in the country's south where its speakers are concentrated. Other languages spoken by ethnic minorities in Albania include Aromanian, Serbo-Croatian, Macedonian, Bulgarian, Gorani, and Roma. Macedonian is official in the Pustec Municipality in East Albania. In the 2023 population census, 91.07% reported Albanian as the language spoken at home. 1.54% declared to speak at home another language, 0.57% multiple languages, 1.21% gave no answer and 5.59% were unavailable.
Among young people aged 25 or less, English, German and Turkish have seen rising interest after 2000. Italian and French have had a stable interest, while Greek has lost much of its previous interest. The trends are linked with cultural and economic factors.
In the mid-2010s, an increasing number of Albanians showed interest in learning the German language, which has been explained as part of "a Western Balkan trend of preparing to integrate into the German labor market". Some of them have gone to Germany for studies or work. Albania and Germany have agreements for cooperating in helping young people of the two countries know both cultures better. Due to a sharp rise in economic relations with Turkey, interest in learning Turkish, in particular among young people, was also growing on a yearly basis in the 2010s.

Minorities
Designated national and cultural minorities in Albania include Aromanian, Greek, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Serb, Roma, Egyptian, Bosnian and Bulgarian peoples, as well as Gorani and Jews as other minority groups. The 2023 census recorded the ethnic composition as Albanians 2,186,917 (91,04% of the total), Greeks 23,485 (0,98%), Macedonians 2,281 (0,09%), Montenegrins 511 (0,02%), Aromanians 2,459 (0,1%), Roma 9,813 (0.4%), Balkan Egyptians 12,375 (0,5%), Bosnians 2,963 (0,12%), Serbians 584 (0,02%), Bulgarians 7,057 (0,29%), mixed ethnicities 770 (0.03%), other ethnicities 3,798 (0.15%), and 134,451 (5.60%) with unspecified ethnicity, out of a total population of 2,402,113.

Religion
Albania is a secular and religiously diverse country with no official religion. Freedom of religion, belief and conscience are guaranteed under the country's constitution. As of the 2023 Census, there were 1,101,718 (45.86%) Sunni Muslims, 201,530 (8.38%) Catholics, 173,645 (7.22%) Eastern Orthodox, 115,644 (4.81%) Bektashi Muslims, 9,658 (0.4%) Evangelicals, 3,670 (0.15%) of other religions, 332,155 (13.82%) believers without religion or denomination, 85,311 (3.55%) Atheists and 378,782 (15.76%) did not provide an answer. Albania is nevertheless ranked among the least religious countries in the world. Religion constitute an important role in the lives of only 39% of the country's population. In another report, 56% considered themselves religious, 30% considered themselves non-religious, while 9% defined themselves as convinced atheists. 80% believed in God.
The Muslim Albanians are spread throughout the country. Orthodox and Bektashis are mostly found in the south, whereas Catholics mainly live in the north. In 2008, there were 694 Catholic churches and 425 Orthodox churches, 568 mosques and 70 bektashi takyas in the country.
During modern times, the Albanian republican, monarchic and later communist regimes followed a systematic policy of separating religion from official functions and cultural life. The country has never had an official religion either as a republic or as a kingdom. In the 20th century, the clergy of all faiths was weakened under the monarchy and ultimately eradicated during the 1950s and 1960s, under the state policy of obliterating all organised religion from the territories of Albania. The communist regime persecuted and suppressed religious observance and institutions and entirely banned religion. The country was then officially declared to be the world's first atheist state. Religious freedom has returned, however, since the end of communism.
Islam survived communist era persecution and reemerged in the modern era as a practised religion in Albania. Some smaller Christian sects in Albania include Evangelicals and several Protestant communities including Seventh-day Adventist Church, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Jehovah's Witnesses. The first recorded Protestant of Albania was Said Toptani, who travelled around Europe and returned to Tirana in 1853, where he preached Protestantism. The first evangelical Protestants appeared in the 19th century and the Evangelical Alliance was founded in 1892. Nowadays, it has 160 member congregations from different Protestant denominations. Following mass emigration to Israel after the fall of communism, there are only 200 Albanian Jews left in the country.

Education
In Albania, education is secular, free, compulsory, and based on three levels. The academic year is apportioned into two semesters, beginning in September or October and ending in June or July. Albanian is the primary language of instruction in the country's academic institutions. The study of a first foreign language is mandatory and taught most often at elementary and bilingual schools. Languages taught in schools are English, Italian, French and German. Albania has a school life expectancy of 16 years and a literacy rate of 98.7%, with 99.2% for men and 98.3% for women.
Compulsory primary education is divided into two levels, elementary and secondary school, from grade one to five and six to nine, respectively. Pupils are required to attend school from the age six until they turn 16. Upon successful completion of primary education, all pupils are entitled to attend high schools, specialising in any field, including arts, sports, languages, sciences, and technology.
Tertiary education is optional and has undergone a thorough reformation and restructuring in compliance with the principles of the Bologna Process. There are a significant number of private and public institutions of higher education in Albania's major cities. Tertiary education is organised into three successive levels, the bachelor, master, and doctorate.

Health
The constitution of Albania guarantees its citizens equal, free, and universal health care. The health care system is organised into primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare, and is in a process of modernisation and development. The life expectancy at birth in Albania is 77.8 years, ranking 37th in the world and surpassing several developed countries. The average healthy life expectancy is 68.8 years, ranking 37th in the world. The country's infant mortality rate was estimated at 12 per 1,000 live births in 2015. In 2000, the country had the world's 55th-best healthcare performance, as defined by the World Health Organisation (WHO).
Cardiovascular disease is the principal cause of death in Albania, accounting for 52% of deaths. Accidents, injuries, malignant and respiratory diseases are other primary causes of death. Neuropsychiatric disease has also increased due to recent demographic, social, and economic changes in the country.
In 2009, Albania had a fruit and vegetable supply of 886 grams per capita per day, the fifth-highest supply in Europe. Compared to other developed and developing countries, Albania has a relatively low rate of obesity, probably thanks to the Mediterranean diet. According to 2016 WHO data, 21.7% of adults in the country are clinically overweight, with a Body mass index (BMI) score of 25 or more.

Culture
Symbols
The red and black national colours are displayed on the flag of Albania that is adorned with a double-headed eagle as the foremost recognised national symbol of Albania. With the black eagle portraying bravery and strength, the red field symbolises the fortitude and sacrifices of the Albanian people. The eagle is linked with the legacy of the national hero Gjergj Kastrioti, renowned as Skanderbeg, who led a prosperous resistance movement against Ottoman rule. Rooted in the Middle Ages, it emerged as a heraldic symbol in the Principality of Arbër and among notable Albanian dynasties such as the Dukagjini, Kastrioti, Muzaka and Thopia clans. Amid the Albanian Renaissance, marking the resurgence of Albanian national identity and aspirations for independence, the Albanian eagle regained its prominence. Its importance reached its culmination with Albania's declaration of independence in 1912, when Ismail Qemali raised it as the national flag in Vlorë.
The coat of arms of Albania is an adaptation of the flag of Albania and the seal of Skanderbeg. The coat comprises the black double-headed eagle positioned at the centre of a red field. Above the eagle, it carries the helmet of Skanderbeg that is crowned with the head of a golden horned goat. Ti Shqipëri, më jep nder, më jep emrin Shqipëtar, which translates to "You Albania, give me honour, give me the name Albanian", is the national motto of Albania. It finds its foundation in the legacy of national poet Naim Frashëri, who held a renowned role during the Albanian Renaissance. The national anthem of Albania, "Himni i Flamurit", was composed by Asdreni and adopted as such following Albania's independence in 1912.

Clothing
Albanian traditional clothing, with its contrasting variations for the northern Gheg and southern Tosk Albanians, is a testament to Albania's history, cultural diversity and ethnic identity. Gheg men wear a light-colored shirt paired with wide loose-fitting trousers referred to as the Tirq. These trousers are securely fastened by a wide woven belt, the Brez. An integral component of their costume is the Xhamadan, a woolen red velvet vest adorned with folkloric motifs and gold patterns. They also wear a distinctive dome-shaped hat known as the Qeleshe, crafted from wool, with its origins tracing back to the Illyrians. Conversely, Tosk men opt for the Fustanella, a knee-length garment designated as the national costume, typically white with pleats, accompanied by a white shirt. They also wear a beige or dark blue Xhamadan reminiscent of the Gheg attire. To complete their attire, men wear knee-high socks referred to as Çorape and leather shoes known as Opinga.
The attire of Gheg and Tosk women is renowned for its rich palette of colors and intricate filigree detailing, displayed across various components including ear ornaments, finger rings, necklaces, belt buckles and buttons. Key components include a long, light-toned shirt paired with an apron, often accompanied by a woolen or felt mantle referred to as the Xhoka. Additional upper garments, such as the Dollama or Mintan, may be layered, along with a headscarf known as Kapica or Shall. A distinctive variation incorporates a pair of aprons, including the Pështjellak at the rear and the Paranik at the front. Integral to the traditional attire of Gheg women is the ancient Xhubleta. Dedicated efforts have been undertaken to preserve and promote the dress, acknowledging its significance as an emblem of Albanian heritage. As a testament to its importance, the Xhubleta has been inscribed on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List. The distinctive bell-shaped garment is fashioned in black and enriched with embroidered ethnic Albanian motifs, showcasing the remarkable craftsmanship of northern Albania. Its crafting process involves multiple intricate stages, encompassing the preparation of shajak fabric and the precise cutting techniques.

Art and architecture
The artistic history of Albania has been particularly influenced by a multitude of ancient and medieval people, traditions and religions. It covers a broad spectrum with mediums and disciplines that include painting, pottery, sculpture, ceramics and architecture all of them exemplifying a great variety in style and shape, in different regions and period.
The rise of the Byzantine and Ottoman Empire in the Middle Ages was accompanied by a corresponding growth in Christian and Islamic art in the lands of Albania which are apparent in examples of architecture and mosaics throughout the country. Centuries later, the Albanian Renaissance proved crucial to the emancipation of the modern Albanian culture and saw unprecedented developments in all fields of literature and art whereas artists sought to return to the ideals of Impressionism and Romanticism. However, Onufri, Kolë Idromeno, David Selenica, Kostandin Shpataraku and the Zografi Brothers are the most eminent representatives of Albanian art.
The architecture of Albania reflects the legacy of various civilisations tracing back to the classical antiquity. Major cities in Albania have evolved from within the castle to include dwellings, religious and commercial structures, with constant redesigning of town squares and evolution of building techniques. Nowadays, the cities and towns reflect a whole spectrum of various architectural styles. In the 20th century, many historical as well as sacred buildings bearing the ancient influence were demolished during the communist era.
Ancient architecture is found throughout Albania and most visible in Byllis, Amantia, Phoenice, Apollonia, Butrint, Antigonia, Shkodër and Durrës. Considering the long period of rule of the Byzantine Empire, they introduced castles, citadels, churches and monasteries with spectacular wealth of visible murals and frescos. Perhaps the best known examples can be found in the southern Albanian cities and surroundings of Korçë, Berat, Voskopojë and Gjirokastër. Involving the introduction of Ottoman architecture there was a development of mosques and other Islamic buildings, particularly seen in Berat and Gjirokastër.
A productive period of Historicism, Art Nouveau and Neoclassicism merged into the 19th century, best exemplified in Korçë. The 20th century brought new architectural styles such as the modern Italian style, which is present in Tirana such as the Skanderbeg Square and Ministries. It is also present in Shkodër, Vlorë, Sarandë and Durrës. Moreover, other towns received their present-day Albania-unique appearance through various cultural or economic influences.
Socialist classicism arrived during the communist era in Albania after the Second World War. At this period many socialist-styled complexes, wide roads and factories were constructed, while town squares were redesigned and numerous of historic and important buildings demolished. Notable examples of that style include the Mother Teresa Square, Pyramid of Tirana, Palace of Congresses and so on.
Three Albanian archaeological sites are included in the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. These include the ancient remains of Butrint, the medieval Historic Centres of Berat and Gjirokastër, and Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region site shared with North Macedonia since 2019. Furthermore, the royal Illyrian tombs, the remains of Apollonia, the ancient Amphitheatre of Durrës and the Fortress of Bashtovë has been included on the tentative list of Albania.

Music
Albanian folk music is a prominent part of the national identity, and continues to play a major part in overall Albanian music. Folk music can be divided into two stylistic groups, mainly the northern Gheg varieties, and southern Lab and Tosk varieties. Northern and southern traditions are contrasted by a rugged tone from the north, and the more relaxed southern form of music.
Many songs concern events from Albanian history and culture, including traditional themes of honour, hospitality, treachery, and revenge. The first compilation of Albanian folk music was made by two Himariot musicians, Neço Muka and Koço Çakali, in Paris, during their work with Albanian soprano Tefta Tashko-Koço. Several gramophone compilations were recorded at the time by the three artists, which eventually led to the recognition of Albanian iso-polyphony as a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage.
Festivali i Këngës is a traditional Albanian song contest organised by the national broadcaster Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH). The festival is celebrated annually since its inauguration in 1962 and has launched the careers of some of Albania's most successful singers including Vaçe Zela and Parashqevi Simaku. It is significantly a music competition among Albanian performers presenting unreleased songs in premiere, composed by Albanian authors and voted by juries or by public.
Contemporary artists Rita Ora, Bebe Rexha, Era Istrefi, Dua Lipa, Ava Max, Bleona, Elvana Gjata, Ermonela Jaho, and Inva Mula have achieved international recognition for their music, while soprano Ermonela Jaho has been described by some as the "world's most acclaimed soprano". Albanian opera singer Saimir Pirgu was nominated for the 2017 Grammy Award.

Literature
The cultural renaissance was first of all expressed through the development of the Albanian language in the area of church texts and publications. The Protestant reforms invigorated hopes for the development of the local language and literary tradition, when cleric Gjon Buzuku translated the Catholic liturgy into Albanian, trying to do for Albanian what Martin Luther had done for German. Meshari (The Missal) written by Gjon Buzuku was published in 1555 and is considered one of the first literary work of written Albanian during the Middle Ages. The refined level of the language and the stabilised orthography must be the result of an earlier tradition of written Albanian, a tradition that is not well understood. However, there is some fragmented evidence, pre-dating Buzuku, which indicates that Albanian was written from at least the 14th century.

Albanian writings from these centuries must not have been religious texts only, but historical chronicles too. They are mentioned by the humanist Marin Barleti, who in his book Siege of Shkodër (Rrethimi i Shkodrës) from 1504, confirms that he leafed through such chronicles written in the language of the people (in vernacula lingua) as well as his famous biography of Skanderbeg Historia de vita et gestis Scanderbegi Epirotarum principis (History of Skanderbeg) from 1508. The History of Skanderbeg is still the foundation of Skanderbeg studies and is considered an Albanian cultural treasure, vital to the formation of Albanian national self-consciousness.
During the 16th and the 17th centuries, the catechism (E mbësuame krishterë) (Christian Teachings) from 1592 written by Lekë Matrënga, (Doktrina e krishterë) (The Christian Doctrine) from 1618 and (Rituale romanum) 1621 by Pjetër Budi, the first writer of original Albanian prose and poetry, an apology for George Castriot (1636) by Frang Bardhi, who also published a dictionary and folklore creations, the theological-philosophical treaty Cuneus Prophetarum (The Band of Prophets) (1685) by Pjetër Bogdani, the most universal personality of Albanian Middle Ages, were published in Albanian. The most famous Albanian writer in the 20th and 21st century is probably Ismail Kadare.

Cuisine
Throughout the centuries, Albanian cuisine has been widely influenced by Albanian culture, geography and history, and as such, different parts of the country enjoy specific regional cuisines. Cooking traditions especially vary between the north and the south, owing to differing topography and climate that essentially contribute to the excellent growth conditions for a wide array of herbs, fruits, and vegetables.
Albanians produce and use many varieties of fruits such as lemons, oranges, figs, and most notably, olives, which are perhaps the most important element of Albanian cooking. Spices and other herbs such as basil, lavender, mint, oregano, rosemary, and thyme are widely used, as are vegetables such as garlic, onions, peppers, potatoes, tomatoes, as well as legumes of all types.
With a coastline along the Adriatic and Ionian in the Mediterranean Sea, fish, crustaceans, and seafood are a popular and an integral part of the Albanian diet. Otherwise, lamb is the traditional meat for different holidays and religious festivals for both Christians and Muslims, although poultry, beef, and pork are also in plentiful supply.
Tavë kosi ("soured milk casserole") is the national dish of Albania, consisting of lamb and rice baked under a thick, tart veil of yoghurt. Fërgesë is another national dish, made up of peppers, tomatoes, and cottage cheese. Pite is also popular, a baked pastry with a filling of a mixture of spinach and gjizë (curd) or mish (ground meat).
Petulla, a traditional fried dough, is also a popular speciality, and is served with powdered sugar or feta cheese and different sorts of fruit jams. Flia consists of multiple crêpe-like layers brushed with cream and served with sour cream. Krofne, similar to Berliner doughnuts, are filled with jam, or chocolate and often eaten during winter.
Coffee is an integral part of the Albanian lifestyle. The country has more coffee houses per capita than any other country in the world. Tea is also enjoyed both at home or outside at cafés, bars, or restaurants. Çaj Mali (Sideritis tea) is enormously beloved, and a part of the daily routine for most Albanians. It is cultivated across Southern Albania and noted for its medicinal properties. Black tea is also popular.
Albanian wine is also common throughout the country, and has been cultivated for thousands of years. Albania has a long and ancient history of wine production, and belongs to the Old World of wine producing countries.

Sports
Albania participated at the Olympic Games in 1972 for the first time. The country made their Winter Olympic Games debut in 2006. Albania missed the next four games, two of them due to the 1980 and 1984 boycotts, but returned for the 1992 games in Barcelona. Since then, Albania have participated in all games. Albania normally competes in events that include swimming, athletics, weightlifting, shooting and wrestling. The country have been represented by the National Olympic Committee of Albania since 1972. The nation has participated at the Mediterranean Games since the games of 1987 in Syria. The Albanian athletes have won a total of 43 (8 gold, 17 silver and 18 bronze) medals from 1987 to 2013.
Popular sports in Albania include football, weightlifting, basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, rugby union and gymnastics. Football is by far the most popular sport in Albania. It is governed by the Football Association of Albania (Albanian: Federata Shqiptare e Futbollit, F.SH.F.), which has membership in FIFA and UEFA.
The Albania national football team, ranking 51st in the World in 2017 (highest 22nd on 22 August 2015) have won the 1946 Balkan Cup and the Malta Rothmans International Tournament 2000, but had never participated in any major UEFA or FIFA tournament, until UEFA Euro 2016, Albania's first ever appearance at the continental tournament and at a major men's football tournament. Albania scored their first ever goal in a major tournament and secured their first ever win in European Championship when they beat Romania by 1–0 in a UEFA Euro 2016 match on 19 June 2016. The most successful football clubs are Skënderbeu, KF Tirana, Dinamo Tirana, Partizani and Vllaznia.
Weightlifting is one of the most successful individual sports for the Albanians, with the national team winning medals at the European Weightlifting Championships and the rest international competitions. Albanian weightlifters have won a total of 16 medals at the European Championships with one of them being gold, seven silver and eight bronze. In the World Weightlifting Championships, the Albanian weightlifting team has won in 1972 a gold, in 2002 a silver, and in 2011 a bronze medal.

See also
Outline of Albania
Bibliography of Albania

Notes
References
Sources
Further reading
External links
albania.al (in English)
president.al (in Albanian)
kryeministria.al (in Albanian)
parlament.al (in Albanian)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Albania
"Albania". The World Factbook (2025 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency.

## Tourism in Albania
Tourism in Albania has been a key element of the country's economic activity and is constantly developing. Albania is characterized by its rich archaeological and cultural heritage dating back to the classical period when Illyrians and Ancient Greeks inhabited the region. Over the course of history, the territory of Albania was occupied and populated by Romans, Byzantines, Venetians and Ottomans. Notably the country features unspoiled beaches, mountainous landscapes, traditional cuisine, archaeological artifacts, unique traditions, low prices and the wild atmosphere of the countryside.
The country lies in Southeastern Europe bordering Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east and Greece to the south. The Mediterranean Sea with the Adriatic and Ionian Sea make up the entire west border of the country. The country's coastline length is about 481 km (299 mi) composed of both sandy and rocky beaches,
bays, caves, cliffs, capes and lagoons. Although the country features notable diversity with the landscape ranging from the snow-capped Albanian Alps, Sharr,
Skanderbeg, Korab, Pindus and Ceraunian Mountains to the sunny Albanian Adriatic and Ionian Sea Coasts.

The country has a distinctly Mediterranean climate. Across the country's territory there is a wide range of microclimates due to differing soil types and topography. The warmest areas of the country are found at the coasts where the climate is profoundly impacted by the sea, while the coldest parts at the northern and eastern hinterlands, where snowy forested climate is prevalent.
With a total of 3.8 million visitors, Albania is the 25th most visited country in Europe. Lonely Planet ranked Albania as the number 1 destination to be visited in 2011. The New York Times ranked Albania 4th among 52 destinations to be visited in 2014. Although still underdeveloped, Albania is set to prime its debut on the world scene as it celebrates a century of independence. A Huffington Post article outlined 10 reasons for visiting Albania in 2013. Recently, Albania has been given the official slogan "Go Your Own Way". Previously, it had the slogan "A New Mediterranean Love". According to the Albanian Institute of Statistics, around 4.73 million foreign citizens have visited Albania in 2016. Foreign tourism in the country has boomed since 2019.

A number of renowned international hotel chains are making their presence known in Albania, including Mariott, Hyatt, Maritim Plaza, Hilton Garden Inn, MK Hotels, and Best Western in Tirana, as well as Melia Hotels International in Durrës, while others are awaiting the green light to start operations mainly in Tirana, the Albanian Alps, and along the Albanian Riviera.

Agritourism
The trend for agritourism is a form of tourism in the countryside which combines agriculture and tourism and is exponentially developing in Albania. The government of Albania has identified this form of tourism as an important and sustainable tourism opportunity and prioritised its development as a rural economic diversification concept within the country's 100+ villages Programme.

Regions
Northern Albania
The northern region of the country is particularly known for its natural and cultural heritage, picturesque alpine mountainous landscapes, scenic highlands, glacial lakes, rich flora and fauna, curative sandy beaches, and historic regions with ancient traditions and delicious cuisine. It is underlain by karstic rock, mainly dolomite and limestone with associated lakes and cave which has given rise to the most distinctive feature of its lakes and rivers.
The Albanian Alps are among the most valuable and unique features of the northern region of Albania. Its mountainous landscape with multiple contrasts, traversed by river valleys with crystal waters, gorges and mountain saddles with a rich biodiversity attracts both domestic and foreign tourists from all over the world.
Gashi River and Rajcë are both a UNESCO World Heritage Site and Nature Reserve. They offers a fascinating and incredibly diverse picture of the original landscapes with less human impact. The river originates and flows through the Albanian Alps in the north until it reaches the Valbona River.

Both Valbonë Valley National Park and Theth National Park stretches within the Albanian Alps and offers a variety of opportunities for tourism, fishing, mountaineering and trekking. The Valbona Pass, standing at 1,795 ha (17.95 km2), separates the national parks. The Albanian traditions, hospitality, culture and culinary values of this region are strong elements that those parks offer for tourists.

The villages of Theth are surrounded on four sides by numerous two-thousanders such as Radohima in the west, Arapi and Poplluka in the north and Jezerca in the east. It is well known for its unique Roman Catholic churches, folk traditions but also its natural heritage.
Nikaj-Mërtur Regional Nature Park is an area of scenic alpine landscapes, deep river valleys, vertical cliffs, dense forests and small lakes. It lies within the Dukagjin highlands and borders Valbonë Valley National Park in the northeast and Theth National Park in the north and northeast.
The Lake Koman within the Albanian Alps, a unique journey amidst spectacular mountain views, is considered one of the most popular ferry rides in Southern Europe. Sometimes it reminds of the Scandinavian fjords.

Shkodër has been founded since the 4th century BC by the Illyrian tribes of the Ardiaei and Labeates. Nowadays, it exerts strong influences in culture, religion, arts and entertainment of northern Albania. The city is dotted with numerous different structures. It retains its characteristic appearance with narrow streets with tall stone walls on both sides and tall gates. The Rozafa Castle, east of the city, is one of the most prominent architectural features on the region.

Lake Shkodër, the largest lake in Southern Europe, is a popular destination due to its natural richness and ease of access both from land and sea. The surrounding area around the lake is desirable for a vacation spent in peace and quiet. Other tourist attractions include sailing, fishing and other water sports.
Emerging agritourism areas includes Pukë, the panoramic Ulëz lake and the nearby Vau i Dejes, Barbullush and Fishte villages in Zadrima near the city of Lezhë, Katund i Vjeter in the Mirdita region near Rubik, but also Shishtavec near Kukës, and the alpine area of Nikaj-Mertur in Lekbibaj region near Bajram Curri. Other emerging areas include fishing villages of Shiroka, Zogaj, and Grile or Omaraj along the Lake Shkodër.
Northern Albania's main seaside towns include Shengjin and Velipoja, the former being a major port town and the latter known for its curative beach sand. Very popular during the summer months, Shengjin is becoming worldwide known for organizing electronic music UNUM Festival at Rana e Hedhun sand dune tourist attraction. Velipoja is known for its protected area of abundant pine trees and fauna species.

Central Albania
The central region of Albania alternates between archaeological sites, castles, caves, long stretches of curative sandy beaches and lagoons, perfect for bird-watching. It encompasses mostly the counties of Durrës, Tirana, Fier and Elbasan. In terms of geology, it is dominated by the Myzeqe Plain in the west Skanderbeg in the center and Korab Mountains in the east.
Tirana, the country's capital city, officially dubbed as 'The Place Beyond Belief' by local authorities is known for its cultural heritage, religious diversity, the colourful buildings, Italian and Socialist architecture, and natural attractions such as Dajti Mt and parks around artificially created lakes. Tirana is also widely known for its stylish restaurant scene featuring particularly delicious food under the Slow Food lifestyle, and the traditional agritourism areas in the southern and eastern outskirts of the city towards Durrës, Elbasan, and Dajti respectively. The city organizes many festivals, sports competitions, live music performances, and is home to several regionally known shopping centers.

Dajti National Park encompasses Dajti, the capital's hausberg in the east. It is accessible all year round and can be reached on foot or cable cars. Climbing the mountain offers visitors views down into Tirana and over the mountains behind it, part of the Mali me Gropa-Bizë-Martanesh Protected Landscape. Dajti has been referred to as the Balcony of Tirana because of its panoramic vista.
Krujë, the capital of the Principality of Arbër during the Middle Ages, is called by locals as the Adriatic Balcony from the view that offers day and night. Due to the long and continuous history of the city, it is home to several archaeological sites and structures that are still evident.

Durrës is one of the oldest cities in the world and home to the Durrës Amphitheatre, which is among the largest in the Balkan Peninsula. Numerous elements of different architectural styles from antiquity to present day are present throughout the city. The coastal waters offer beaches, bays, capes, fishing and sailing.
The Divjaka-Karavasta National Park includes the Karavasta Lagoon, the largest lagoon in the country and one of the largest in the Adriatic Sea. The lagoon is separated from the sea by a narrow strip of sand. Its mediterranean climate and geology enables the presence of a wide range of animals and plants, which are fast becoming rare in Southern Europe.

Apollonia is one of the most popular archaeological sites in the country, which was inhabited by both Taulantiis and Corinthians in antiquity. It is one of the most complete architectural and cultural features on the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast. The remains of the site have been investigated by archaeologists from 1916, still, much of the site remains unexcavated to this day.

Lura-Dejes Mt National Park is known for its twelve glacial lakes, which were formed during the Würm glacial period. It provides striking scenery with intensive fissures and mountainous landscape without any human intervention, very rare in Southern Europe.

Shtamë Pass National Park is mostly composed of dense forests, in which pine trees and oak dominate. Recently it is becoming an attraction for hiking.
Fir of Drenova National Park has a particular importance on the trans-boundary exchanges of flora and fauna elements, while it represents a key habitat and bio-corridor for a wide range of animals and plants. Tourists have often been attracted by the rock formations which are present and look unique.
Shebenik-Jabllanice National Park is one of the country’s newest national parks. It is particularly known for dwelling a number of different species that are fast becoming rare in the Balkans and hosting several glacial lakes within the mountains of Shebenik and Jabllanica.
Korab-Koritnik Nature Park encompasses the country's highest mountain Korab in the east which is shared with the Republic of Macedonia. Although in terms of geology, it is strongly composed of karst and limestone and high mountains. This has resulted in diverse topographic features within the boundaries of the park such as valleys, rivers, glacial lakes, caves and canyons.
Besides the beaches, the central region is abundant in lagoons and other natural ecosystems providing wonderful opportunities for those passionate about the study and observation of birds such as the Patoku Lagoon, Kune-Vain Lagoon and Narta Lagoon.

Southern Albania
The southern region of the country is mostly mountainous and has become famous for its mediterranean atmosphere, diverse landscape, scenic coastline and villages and towns by the shoreline. The presence of several mountain ranges such as the Ceraunian and Pindus Mountains has ultimately shaped the diverse landscape of the south of Albania.
Stretching in the southwest, the Albanian Riviera is well known for its pure blue and turquoise beaches and has been a favorite destination for local and foreign visitors. Aside from its beaches, it is also a destination for relaxation, tranquility, and nightlife with several music festivals such as Kala Festival and a number of renown nightclubs. Many villages and towns in the area are nationally known such as Dhërmi, Lukovë, Palasë, Qeparo and Borsh.

Butrint is both a UNESCO World Heritage Site and National Park. The city lies in the south of Sarandë along the southern Albanian Ionian Sea Coast. Historically, it was inhabited since Prehistory but was founded as Greek and Roman colony during the Bronze Age. Numerous monuments are well-preserved today such as the ancient city walls, a baptistery, a great basilica, a theatre and castles. The remains are all located within a great natural woodland with a complex ecosystem and biodiversity, which depends on the nearby freshwater Lake Butrint as well as the direct proximity to the Mediterranean Sea. The combination of history, culture and environment makes Butrint a unique place, a landscape with monuments as beloved of the tourists.

The Karaburun-Sazan Marine Park comprises the Karaburun Peninsula along with Sazan Island in southern Albania. Its terrain is characterized by mountains, caves, depressions, bays, canyons and wide beaches. Although it features ruins of sunken ships, a rich flora and fauna, ancient inscriptions, secluded beaches and scenic views of both the Adriatic and Ionian Sea.
Llogara National Park is well known for its diversified biodiversity and natural environment, which is relatively unaffected by human development. The mixture of refreshing high altitude mountain air at the Ceraunian Mountains and proximity to the Albanian Riviera makes it very attractive destination for tourists. The region is also important for the growth of ecotourism, hiking and paragliding.

Sarandë is a coastal town along the southern Albanian Ionian Sea Coast situated on a horseshoe bay between mountains and hills. The naturally occurring phenomenon of the Blue Eye Spring and architectural treasures such as Phoenice, the ancient city walls, ruins of a synagogue, a monastery and castle are among the most prominent attractions around the city.
Fir of Hotova-Dangell National Park is the country's largest national park and stretches within a remote mountainous region of Nemërçka and Tomorr between the Vjosa Valley in the west and the Osum Valley in the northeast. The narrow and deep Lengarica Canyon in Përmet with numerous caves and thermal springs such as Banjat e Bënjës are among the most visited areas in the park.

Pogradec and Lin straddles on the western shores of Lake Ohrid in the east. The lake is one of the most ancient lakes in the world and preserves a unique aquatic ecosystem that is of worldwide importance. Various monuments from different ancient civilizations are still evident in this region such as the Royal Illyrian Tombs, the Byzantine Churches of Lin and St. Marina.
Tomorr National Park encompasses Mount Tomorr in the south, which is in Albanian folklore anthropomorphized and associated with the legendary figure of Baba Tomor. Within the Osum Canyon, close to the national park, there are a number of rock formations, caves and waterfalls and are a spectacular natural attraction in the region.

Berat is one of the world's oldest continuously inhabited cities and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city is known as a museum and city and also referred as the city of thousands of windows. Today, the city bears witness to the coexistence of various religious and cultural communities down the centuries. Treasures from the Illyrians, Romans, Greeks, Byzantines and Ottomans are still alive in the city. Among the attractions in the city and the surroundings are Byllis, Apollonia, Bachelors' Mosque, Berat Castle and Citadel, Gorica Bridge, Lead Mosque, Red Mosque, St. Theodore's Church, St. Mary of Blachernae Church, Dormition Cathedral and Ardenica Monastery.

Gjirokastër is listed with Berat as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city is described as a rare example of a well-preserved Ottoman town, built by farmers of large estate. Typical houses consist of a tall stone block structures which can be up to five stories high. There are external and internal staircases that surround the houses. It is thought that such design stems from fortified country houses typical in the region.
Korçë is known for its quarters, composed of low houses and villas and many architectural buildings of various styles such as Historicism, Art Nouveau and Neoclassicism. Cultural elements from Albanians, Greeks, Italians and French merged within the city to create a unique culture. The largest carnival of Albania is here organized which takes place before Orthodox Easter. Among the most prominent sites in the city include the Illyrian Kamenica Tumulus.

Voskopojë reached its peak in the 18th century and is nowadays considered a holy place by local Orthodox Christians. The remaining churches in the region are among the most representative of 18th-century ecclesiastical art in the Balkans.
Prespa National Park encompasses both Lake Prespa and Small Prespa Lake in the border triangle of Albania, Greece and Macedonia. The island of Maligrad, within the large Prespa, is dotted with a monastery and several caves, which are suitable for wildlife and a circular cliff. Hundreds of different species of animals and plants thrive in the national park.

Attractions
Castles and forts
Albania's scenic landscapes are dotted with castles, forts and citadels. The castles and forts of the country constitute treasures and legacy of the historic past of Albania. From the early antiquity to the medieval period, they were originally made of earth and wood and later of stone and comes in many styles of architecture and design. The majority of forts have been renovated throughout history and different epochs with changing rule and adaptations to war technology development.
Rozafa Castle is an ancient castle and one of the most prominent sites in Shkodër. The castle is associated with a famous legend about a woman who was buried in the foundation of the castle. It stretches on a rocky hill and is trapped on three sides by the rivers of Buna, Kir and Drin. Shkodër served in the 4th century BC as the royal capital of the Illyrian tribes of the Ardiaei and Labeates. During that period, the castle was an Illyrian stronghold until it was captured by the Romans in 167 BC. Its current name, Rozafa, appeared for the first time in the early Middle Ages. Later when the Ottomans conquered the Balkans the castle then was turned into a mosque.

Petrelë Castle is a medieval castle close to Tirana located on a hilltop overlooking Petrelë and Erzen Valley. The castle has a triangular structure with two observation towers. The early fortifications probably date from the 3rd century, while in the 9th century it was expanded and served as a base for Gjergj Kastrioti Skënderbeu during its revolt against the Ottoman Empire.
Prezë Castle is a small fortification while the construction of which started in the 14th century and was completed in the early 15th century. It played a strategically important role for the region, especially in the Middle Ages, as it controlled the road from Durrës to Krujë and served as a point for the exchange of news between the castles of Petrelë and Krujë.
Ali Pasha Castle was built within a small island along the mouth of the Vivari Channel in Butrint National Park and is named after the Albanian ruler Ali Pasha of Ioannina, who ruled over the Pashalik of Yanina and even attempted to rival the Dey of Algiers in the seas. The castle is a small rectangular structure with battered walls, while along the corners, there are two battered round towers with cannons on its seaward side and two irregularly sized battered square towers equipped with firing loops or windows.
Rodoni Castle extend within the Cape of Rodon at the direct proximity to the Adriatic Sea. The name is derived from the Illyrian god of Rodon. Following the First Siege of Krujë and League of Lezhë decided to increase the fortifications for use against the Ottoman Empire. Skanderbeg chose the cape of Rodon as the location of the castle and construction began in 1450.

Routes
Due to the varying geographic elevation, Albania features endless panoramic routes along the mountainous region in Northern Albania as well as the Coastal region along the western lowland and the southern coast bordering both the Adriatic sea and the Ionian sea. The roadways along the beach are mostly new and in good condition.
One of the most renowned routes is the National Road 8 (SH8) from Vlorë to Sarandë in southwestern Albania along the Albanian Riviera starting from the port city of Vlorë into the Llogara Pass, being part of the Llogara National Park, and also along the Ceraunian Mountains. Towards the Llogara Pass the view becomes very spectacular and is one of the most picturesque routes in the Balkan Peninsula.
The A1 Motorway from Rreshen to Kalimash, connects Albania with Kosovo. It offers views of the Albanian mountains in the north along the Fan River Valley. Other routes consist of the SH78 from Jergucat to Delvinë along the Muzina Pass overlooking the Dropulli Plain, and the SH75 from Korçë to Ersekë and Përmet. The Via Egnatia served as a crossroad of important routes linking the Adriatic with Byzantium, today it is along the modern National Road 3 (SH3).

See also
Culture of Albania
Economy of Albania
Cuisine of Albania
Architecture of Albania
Dear Albania

References
External links

Official website

## Culture of Albania
Albanian culture or the culture of Albanians (Albanian: kultura shqiptare [kultuˈɾa ʃcipˈtaɾɛ]) is a term that embodies the artistic, culinary, literary, musical, political and social elements that are representative of ethnic Albanians, which implies not just Albanians of the country of Albania but also Albanians of Kosovo, North Macedonia and Montenegro, where ethnic Albanians are a native population. Albanian culture has been considerably shaped by the geography and history of Albania, Kosovo, parts of Montenegro, parts of North Macedonia, and parts of Northern Greece, traditional homeland of Albanians. It evolved since ancient times in the western Balkans, with its peculiar language, pagan beliefs and practices, way of life and traditions. Albanian culture has also been influenced by the Ancient Greeks, Romans, Byzantines and Ottomans.
The name 'Albanian' derived from the Illyrian tribe of the Albanoi and their capital in Albanopolis that was noted by Ptolemy in ancient times. Previously, Albanians called their country Arbëri or Arbëni and referred to themselves as Arbëreshë or Arbëneshë until the sixteenth century as the toponym Shqipëria or Shqypnia and the endonym Shqiptarë or Shqyptarë gradually replaced Arbëria and Arbëresh. The terms Shqipëria and Shqiptarë are popularly interpreted respectively as the "Land of Eagles" and "Children of Eagles" / "Eagle-Men".
The double-headed eagle is the national and ethnic symbol of all Albanian-speaking people. The symbol appears in a stone carving dating from the tenth century as the Principality of Arbanon was established. It is also documented to have been used as a heraldic symbol by numerous noble families in Albania in the Middle Ages. The double-headed eagle appears as a symbol for bravery, valor, freedom and heroism. The symbol is widely used in Albanian traditional art, including jewellery, embroidery, and house carving.

Tradition and Culture
Albanians can be culturally and linguistically separated into two subgroups: the northern Ghegs and the southern Tosks. The line of demarcation between both groups, based on dialect, is the Shkumbin River that crosses Albania from east to west. Outside of Albania, Gheg is mostly spoken by the Albanians of Kosovo, northwestern North Macedonia, Montenegro and Croatia (Arbanasi). On the other hand, Tosk is spoken by the Albanians of Greece (Arvanites, Chams), southwestern North Macedonia and southern Italy (Arbëreshë). The diversity between Ghegs and Tosks can be substantial, both sides identify strongly with the common national and ethnic culture.
Home of Muslims and Christians, religious tolerance is one of the most important values of the tradition of the Albanian people. It is widely accepted, that Albanians are well known for those values, for a peaceful coexistence among the believers of different religious communities in the country. All the aspects of the Albanian tribal society have been directed by the Kanun, the Albanian traditional customary law. Orally transmitted across the generations, it reflects many legal practices of great antiquity that find precise echoes in other Indo-European cultures such as Vedic India and ancient Greece and Rome.
Thanks to its long history, Albania is home to many valuable monuments such as among others the remains of Butrint, the medieval cities of Berat and Gjirokastër, the Roman amphitheatre of Durrës, the Illyrian Tombs and Fortress of Bashtovë. Other examples of important contributions to architecture may be found in Apollonia, Byllis, Amantia, Phoenice, Shkodër and many others.
Despite being a small country, Albania has three sites on the UNESCO World Heritage Site List and one Intangible Cultural Heritage element. The Codices of Berat are eminently important for the global community and as well the development of ancient Biblical, liturgical and hagiographical literature. Therefore, it was inscribed on the UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2005.

Lifestyle
Kanun
The Kanun, a comprehensive compilation of Albanian traditional customs and cultural practices, was codified by Lekë Dukagjini in the Middle Ages. Scholars have conjectured that the Kanun might have derived from Illyrian tribal laws, while others have suggested that it has retained elements from Indo-European Prehistoric eras. The Kanun reflects notably the historic development of Albanians through its turbulent history and encompasses in a real statute regulating various aspects of life including customs, traditions and wisdom in Albania.
Besa, "to keep the promise", is the Albanian code of honor and a major component of Albanian culture. It is among the highest and most important concept of the Kanun with a moral and ethic connotation. The term contains the given word or keeping of a promise or obligation and the guaranteed agreement among honorable men.
Most notably, Besa means taking care of those in need and being hospitable to every single person. Albania saved and protected almost 2000 Jewish people during the Holocaust. Rather than hiding the Jews in attics or the woods, the Albanians gave them clothes, gave them Albanian names and treated them as part of the family.

There is no trace of any discrimination against Jews in Albania, because Albania happens to be one of the rare lands in Europe today where religious prejudice and hate do not exist, even though Albanians themselves are divided into three faiths. - Herman Bernstein

Fis (clan)
The traditional Albanian social structure is based on clans (Albanian: fise) characterized by a common culture, often common ancestry and shared social ties. In past times most of them defended their territory and interests against other clans and external forces.
The Albanian tribal society clearly crystallized in the mountains of northern Albania and adjacent areas of Montenegro, and it was also present in a less developed system in southern Albania. One of the most particular elements of the Albanian tribal structure is its dependence on the Kanun of Lekë Dukagjini.
This social structure was inherited from the ancient Illyrians, thrived until the early years of the 20th century, and remained largely intact until the rise to power of communist regime in 1944.

Oda
Oda is a typical large room in an Albanian traditional house used by the host to receive and entertain the guests. Traditionally, the host and the guests in the oda are old men and married men. Till the end of the 20th century, woman and young boys were not allowed to enter the room. In the oda, the men talk, take political discussions and sing epic songs until late hours. During an oda "session", historical events and traditions are transmitted orally through discussions and songs.

Holidays
In consideration to the long and eventful history of Albania, there are several cultural and religious holidays throughout the country. Albanians, either in Albania, Kosovo and other countries, celebrate their Independence and Flag Day on November 28. Various ceremonies, festivals and concerts take place to celebrate the historic day in major cities amongst them in Tirana and Pristina, holding festive and military parades.
Christmas is celebrated by those following the religion of Christianity. Bajram is considered by Muslims as the holiday of forgiveness, moral victory and peace, fellowship and unity. They sacrifice a sheep for this holiday, giving the meat to their family, friends and to the poor people.
Another pagan holiday is Dita e Verës, particularly popular in Elbasan and Gjirokastër. It is celebrated on March 14 and is intended to commemorate the end of winter, the rebirth of nature and a rejuvenation of spirit amongst the Albanians. The ritual of the day begins on the previous day with the preparation of sweets such as ballokume cooked in a wood oven. During the evening ballokume, dried figs, walnuts, turkey legs, boiled eggs and simite are distributed to members of the family.
Dita e Mësuesit is celebrated on March 7 since 1887 and is regarded by many Albanians as one of the most important holidays of the country. It honors the opening of the first school that taught lessons in Albanian in Korçë.

Cuisine
The Albanian cuisine, a representative of the Mediterranean cuisine, has developed through the centuries of social and economic changes and more importantly referable to different factors that stands in close interaction with each other such as the small and mountainous territory of the country with virgin forests, narrow valleys, vast plains and a favourable climate that offers excellent growth conditions for a variety of vegetables, herbs and fruits. 
Food is for Albanians an important component of their culture and is deeply rooted in the history, traditions and values of the country. The cooking traditions of the Albanian people are diverse and nevertheless olive oil is the most commonly used vegetable fat in Albanian cooking, which has been produced since antiquity throughout the country particularly along the coasts.
Albanian cuisine uses a variety of ingredients which include a wider availability of vegetables such as zucchini, eggplant, peppers, tomatoes, cucumbers, potatoes, cabbages and spinach, as well as cereals such as wheat, sweetcorn, barley and rye. Herbs and spices include oregano, mint, garlic, onion and basil. Widely used meat varieties are lamb, goat, beef, veal, chicken and other poultry. Considering the direct proximity to the sea, seafood specialties are particularly popular along the Albanian Adriatic and Ionian Sea Coasts.
Hospitality is a fundamental custom of Albanian society and serving food is an integral to the hosting of guests and visitors. It is not infrequent for visitors to be invited to eat and drink with locals. The medieval Albanian code of honor, called Besa, resulted to look after guests and strangers as an act of recognition and gratitude.

Religion
Christianity, Islam and Judaism are the traditional religions of Albania. The constitution extends freedom of religion to all citizens and the government generally respects this right in practice. Albania have always been considered as a unique country in terms of religion and religious tolerance is one of the main characteristics of Albanians.
Christianity has a long and eventful history in the country whereby it belongs to one of the most ancient countries of Christianity. There are thought to have been about seventy Christian families in Durrës as early as the time of the Apostles. Paul the Apostle was the founder of the Archbishopric of Durrës while he was preaching in Illyria and Epirus. In the eleventh century, Albanians first appeared in Byzantine sources and at this point, they were already fully Christianized. The first known bishop of Albania was the Bishop of Scutari founded in 387 in Shkodër. In the late seventeenth century, Pope Clement XI served as the Pope from 1700 to 1721. He was born to an Albanian father descended from the noble Albani family from the region of Malësi e Madhe in Albania.

The history of Judaism in the country can be traced back to the classical era. Jewish migration from the Roman Empire is considered the most likely source of the first Jews on the country's territory. It may have first arrived in Albania in the first century BC. They build the first synagogue in Sarandë in the early fifth century. In the sixteenth century, there were Jewish settlements in most of major cities such as Berat, Elbasan, Vlorë, Durrës and as well as in Kosovo region.
Albania was the only country during the Holocaust in Europe where Jewish population experienced growth. After the mass emigration to Israel following the fall of communist regime, only 200 Albanian Jews are left in the country today. In 2010, a new synagogue "Hechal Shlomo" started providing services for the Jewish community in Tirana.
Islam arrived for the first time in the ninth century to the region, when Muslim Arabs raided the eastern Adriatic Sea. In the fifteenth century, Islam emerged as the majority religion during the centuries of Ottoman rule, though a significant Christian minority remained. After declaration of independence on November 28, 1912, the Albanian republican, monarchic and later the communist regimes followed a systematic policy of separating religion from official functions and cultural life. Albania never had an official state religion either as a republic or as a kingdom.

Arts
Painting
The art of Albania has a long and memorable history, represented in many forms such as painting, sculpture, mosaic and architecture. It show a great variety in style, in different regions and periods. Nonetheless, the country also has a tolerable heritage in visual arts, specifically in frescoes, murals and icons, which often can be seen in many of the older structures in the country.
The surviving monuments of Illyrian, Ancient Greek and Roman art are notable for a tradition concentrating on the human figure and decorations. Through the many archaeological discoveries, in different areas of Albania have been found numerous of pottery, terracotta and metalworking belonging to the Illyrians and several sculptures and mosaics belonging to the Ancient Greeks and Romans. 
Albanian medieval art started with the Byzantine Empire that ruled the great majority of Albania and the Balkan Peninsula. The first paintings have been icons and frescoes with an admirable use of colour and gold. The most famous representative of Albanian medieval art were Onufri who was distinguished for its rich use of colours and decorative shades with certain ethnographic national elements that are more visible with his successors David Selenica, Kostandin Shpataraku and the Zografi Brothers.
Illuminated manuscripts were another significant feature of Albanian medieval art. The Codices of Berat are two ancient Gospels from Berat that dates from the sixth and ninth centuries. They represent one of the most valuable treasures of the Albanian cultural heritage that was inscribed on the UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2005.

In the fifteenth century, during the Ottoman invasion many Albanians migrated out of the area to escape either various socio-political and economic difficulties. Among them, the medieval painters Marco Basaiti and Viktor Karpaçi, sculptor and architect Andrea Nikollë Aleksi and art collector Alessandro Albani from the Albani family.
The Ottoman Empire ruled over the country and most of the Balkans for nearly five centuries. This influence were absorbed and reinterpreted with an extensive construction of mosques that opened a new section in Albanian art, that of Islamic art. 
In the nineteenth century a significant era for Albanian art begins. The great liberation acts starting with League of Prizren in 1878, that led to the Independence in 1912, established the climate for a new artistic movement, which would reflect life and history more realistically and Impressionism and Realism came into dominance.
Contemporary Albanian artwork captures the struggle of everyday Albanians, however new artists are utilizing different artistic styles to convey this message. Albanian artists continue to move art forward, while their art still remains distinctively Albanian in content. Though among Albanian artist postmodernism was fairly recently introduced, there is a number of artists and works known internationally.

Architecture
The country's architecture reflect a rich variety of architectural styles and is rooted in its history, culture and religion. Influences from distant social, religious and exotic communities have contributed to the variety of the architectural landscape in Albania that is richly revealed by archaeological finds that nonetheless retains a certain amount of continuity across history. 
Some of the earliest productions, notably from Illyrians, Ancient Greeks and Romans, are found scattered throughout the country. The best collection of Ancient architecture can be found in Butrint in the southwest, Apollonia, Durrës and Byllis in the west and Amantia and Phoenice in the south. Religion and kingship do not seem to have played an important role in the planning of these towns at that time.
In the Middle Ages a variety of architecture styles developed in the form of dwelling, defense, worship and engineering structures. The consolidation of Albanian principalities gave rise to Varosha, or neighborhoods outside city walls. Examples of such developments are centred in Petrele, Krujë, Tepelenë and Lezhë originating from the feudal castle. Some inherited historic structures were damaged by invading Ottoman forces. Ali Pashe Tepelena embarked on a major castle building campaign throughout Epirus.
Much earlier, the introduction of Christianity brought churches and monasteries which otherwhile became the center of most towns and cities in the country. Byzantine churches and Ottoman mosques are also on the best examples and legacies of Byzantines and Ottomans, which are specifically exemplified in Berat, Gjirokastër and Korçë region.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Albanian medieval towns underwent urban transformations by various Austro-Hungarian and Italian architects, giving them the appearance of western European cities. This can be particularly seen in Tirana and Korçë. They introduced architectural styles such as Historicism, Art Nouveau, Neo-Renaissance and Neoclassicism.

Clothing
Traditional Albanian clothing developed as a result of long processes that has differentiated the country from other countries. Its recorded history of clothing goes back to the classical times. It includes more than two hundred different forms of clothing in all Albania and neighbouring countries that includes without limitation the Albanians in Kosovo, Western North Macedonia, Southern Montenegro, Italy and Greece.
Nothing less than each cultural and geographical region of Albania has its own specific variety of clothing being particularly colorful and rich in detail. The costumes are often decorated with pagan symbolic elements of Illyrians among others suns, eagles, moons, stars and snakes, but predominantly  the zig-zag and concentric circles decoration, found in ancient times throughout the Balkans but also in national costumes of other Balkan peoples.
These clothes are most often worn with connection to special events and celebrations, mostly at ethnic festivals, religious holidays, weddings and by dancing groups. Some conservative old men and women mainly from the high northern as well as southern lands wear those traditional clothes in their daily lives.
They were made mainly of products from the local agriculture and livestock such as leather, wool, linen, hemp fiber and silk. The textiles nowadays are still embroidered in very elaborate ancient patterns. Among the most important parts of clothing includes the Qeleshe, or also known as Plis, the Albanian hat, the Qylafë, the Fustanella, the Xhubleta, the Xhamadan, the Brez, the Çorape, the Opinga and many others.
One of obvious common cultural trait of Gheg, Tosk and Cham Albanians is the predominance of white color in their national dress/costume, with variations in the shapes and designs (Gheg Albanians traditionally wore white trousers while Tosk and Cham Albanians traditionally wore white kilt). The white color seems to have a special place in Albanian culture, as many phrases include the term "white" ( alb. "bardh"), both literally and figuratively ( "fatbardh" -lit. "white fate"- fig. "good luck", "faqe bardh" - lit. "white" face - fig. "clean face" - "intact honor", "rrofsh sa male te bardha" - "May you live as long as white mountains" -  "snow-peaked mountains", etc.).
The white Albanian scull cap, popularly knows as  qeleshe, or plis, etymologically related to Greek Pilos or Pileus cap, is one of the well known Albanian cultural brands.

Music
The Albanian music is very diverse and comes from its indigenous sounds and heritage. Folk music is a prominent part of the national identity with major stylistic differences between the traditional music of the northern Ghegs and southern Labs and Tosks. The northern and southern traditions are contrasted by the rugged and heroic tone of the north and the relaxed form of the south. Albanian folk music has been influential in neighboring areas such as Kosovo, Greece, Bulgaria and Turkey, all home to significant numbers of Albanians.
The Ghegs are known for a distinctive variety of sung epic poetry. Many of the songs are about the ancient history of the country and the constant Albanian themes of honor, hospitality, treachery and revenge. In contrast, Tosk music is soft and gentle, and polyphonic in nature. Notably, Albanian iso-polyphony from the south has been declared an UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
Along with the def, çifteli and sharki are used in the north in a style of dance and pastoral songs. Homemade wind instruments are traditionally used by shepherds in northern Albania; these include the zumarë and lahuta. The southern people are known for ensembles consisting of violins, clarinets, lahuta and def as well.
Music in Albania extends to ancient Illyria and Greece, with influences from the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman Empire. It is evident in archeological findings such as arenas, odeons, theatre buildings and amphitheatres, all over Albania. The remains of temples, libraries, sculptures and paintings of ancient dancers, singers and musical instruments, have been found in territories inhabited by the ancient Illyrians and ancient Greeks.
The tradition of church singing was performed throughout the Middle Ages in the country's territory by choirs or soloists in ecclesiastical centers such as Berat, Durrës and Shkodër. The Middle Ages in Albania included choral music and traditional music. Shën Jan Kukuzeli, a singer, composer and musical innovator of Albanian origin, is one of the earliest known musicians.

Albania has experienced another wave of Western cultural influence, which led to the development of many previously unknown phenomena. The most vivid example is the Albanian rock, hip hop and pop music, with some performers gaining international recognition of Albanian origin from Albania, Kosovo or Albanian diaspora, such as Action Bronson, Ava Max, Bebe Rexha, Dua Lipa, Era Istrefi, Elvana Gjata, Dafina Zeqiri, Albert Stanaj, G4SHI, Ermal Meta, Enca, Noizy and Rita Ora.
Classical music became immensely popular in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and was known across even the most rural sections of the country. It was defined by the tension between classical composer Martin Gjoka along with Fan Noli and Mikel Koliqi, who embraced national identity and added religious and folk elements to their compositions. Most notable Albanian sopranos and tenors have gained also international recognition, among the best known are Inva Mula, Marie Kraja, Saimir Pirgu and Ermonela Jaho.

Dance
The Albanians have a rich tradition of dances with a great diversity of choreography and styles varying on the region due mainly to the fact that Albania is a country with a diverse topography thus the different varieties of dance developed. A couple of dances are ancient and to a certain extent persist nowadays. The dances of the Albanians specifically of the Ghegs from the north have more a solo character than those from the southern Tosks that have more social character, expressed in line and semi circle dances.

Language
Albanian is the most widely spoken language in Albania. It has two major distinct dialects: Tosk spoken in the south and Gheg spoken in the north. The geographical dividing line between those dialects appears to be the river of Shkumbin. Moreover, Albanian dialects are traditional local varieties and are traced back to the different Albanian tribes.
Albanian is an Indo-European language and occupies an independent branch within this family. Scholars and linguists argue that Albanian derives from the ancient Illyrian language, which were spoken in the western part of the Balkan Peninsula by Illyrian tribes.
Today, the language is spoken primarily in Kosovo, North Macedonia, Greece and Montenegro as well. Due to the large Albanian diaspora around the world, centuries-old communities speaking Albanian-based dialects can be particularly found scattered in Greece (Arvanitika, Cham), Italy (Arbëreshë), Southern Serbia and in Croatia (Arbanasi). However, the total number of speakers is much higher than the native speakers in Southern Europe. The four dialects include Tosk Albanian, Gheg Albanian, Arbëresh and Arvanitika.
Most Albanians are multi-lingual, speaking many regional and foreign languages such as Greek, Italian, Serbo-Croatian, English and others.

Mythology
The mythology of Albania consist of myths, legends, folklore, fairy tales and gods of the Albanian people. Many characters in its mythology are included in the Songs of the Frontier Warriors (Albanian: Këngë Kreshnikësh or Cikli i Kreshnikëve). It is divided into two major groups such as legends of metamorphosis and historical legends. The Albanian mythology has its origin to the ancient Illyrians, that inhabited the modern area of Albania during the classical time. Some of the legends, songs and characters include Bardha, Baloz, E Bukura e Dheut, E Bukura e Qiellit, En, Perëndi, Prende, Tomor and Zana e malit.

Literature
The cultural renaissance was first of all expressed through the development of the Albanian in the area of church texts and publications, mainly of the catholic region in the North, but also of the Eastern Orthodox Church in the South. The Protestant reforms invigorated hopes for the development of the local language and literary tradition when cleric Gjon Buzuku translated the Catholic liturgy into Albanian, trying to do for Albanian what Luther did for German.

The Meshari (The Missal) by Gjon Buzuku, published in 1555 is considered one of the first literary works of written Albanian. The refined level of the language and the stabilised orthography must be the result of an earlier tradition of written Albanian, a tradition that is not well understood. However, there is some fragmented evidence, pre-dating Buzuku, which indicates that Albanian was written from at least the 14th century.
The earliest evidence dates from 1332 AD with a Latin report from the French Dominican Guillelmus Adae, Archbishop of Antivari, who wrote that Albanians used Latin letters in their books though their language was quite different from Latin. Other significant examples include: a baptism formula (Unte paghesont premenit Atit et Birit et spertit senit) from 1462, written in Albanian within a Latin text by the Bishop of Durrës, Pal Engjëlli; a glossary of Albanian words of 1497 by Arnold von Harff, a German who had travelled through Albania, and a 15th-century fragment of the Bible from the Gospel of Matthew, also in Albanian, but written in Greek letters.
Albanian writings from these centuries must not have been religious texts only, but historical chronicles too. They are mentioned by the humanist Marin Barleti, who, in his book Rrethimi i Shkodrës (The Siege of Shkodër) (1504), confirms that he leafed through such chronicles written in the language of the people (in vernacula lingua) as well as his biography of Skanderbeg Historia de vita et gestis Scanderbegi Epirotarum principis (History of Skanderbeg) (1508). The History of Skanderbeg is still the foundation of Scanderbeg studies, and is considered an Albanian cultural treasure, vital to the formation of Albanian national self-consciousness.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, the catechism E mbësuame krishterë (Christian Teachings) by Lekë Matrënga in 1592, Doktrina e krishterë (The Christian Doctrine) in 1618, and Rituale romanum in 1621 by Pjetër Budi, the first writer of original Albanian prose and poetry, an apology for George Castriot in 1636 by Frang Bardhi, who also published a dictionary and folklore creations, the theological-philosophical treaty Cuneus Prophetarum (The Band of Prophets) in 1685 by Pjetër Bogdani, the most universal personality of Albanian Middle Ages, were published in Albanian.

Today, Albania's best-known contemporary writer is Ismail Kadare (1936–2024) whose novels have been translated into 45 languages. With his novels The General of the Dead Army (1963), The Siege (1970), Chronicle in Stone (1971), The Three-Arched Bridge (1978), Broken April (1980), The File on H. (1981), The Palace of Dreams (1981), The Pyramid (1992); and The Successor (2002), Kadare brought Albanian literature into the mainstream of modern European literature.
The central theme of Kadare's works is totalitarianism and its mechanisms. His work represents an artistic encyclopedia of Albanian life. The philosophy, beliefs, dramas, and historical and cultural traditions of Albania, filtered through the artistry of the writer, in Kadare's work express the vitality of the spiritual culture of the Albanian people. Kadare creates a modern prose making wide use of historical analogies, parables and associations, Albanian legends and mythology. Starting from the epic world of medieval legends and ballads, the prose of Kadare brings ancient folk traditions 'up to date' by showing their relevance to the modern world.
In 1992 Kadare was awarded the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca; in 1998, the Herder Prize; in 2005, the inaugural Man Booker International Prize; in 2009, the Prince of Asturias Award of Arts; and in 2015, the Jerusalem Prize. He was awarded the Park Kyong-ni Prize in 2019, and the Neustadt International Prize for Literature in 2020. In 1996, France made him a foreign associate of the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques of France, and in 2016, he was a Commandeur de la Légion d'Honneur recipient. He was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature 15 times. Since the 1990s, Kadare was asked by both major political parties in Albania to become a consensual President of Albania, but declined.
His nominating juror for the Neustadt Prize wrote: "Kadare is the successor of Franz Kafka. No one since Kafka has delved into the infernal mechanism of totalitarian power and its impact on the human soul in as much hypnotic depth as Kadare." His writing has also been compared to that of Nikolai Gogol, George Orwell, Gabriel García Márquez, Milan Kundera, and Balzac. Living in Albania during a time of strict censorship, Kadare devised cunning stratagems to outwit Communist censors who had banned three of his books, using devices such as parable, myth, fable, folk-tale, allegory, and legend, sprinkled with double-entendre, allusion, insinuation, satire, and coded messages. In 1990, to escape the Communist regime and its Sigurimi secret police he defected to Paris. The New York Times wrote that he was a national figure in Albania comparable in popularity perhaps to Mark Twain in the United States, and that "there is hardly an Albanian household without a Kadare book." Kadare is regarded by some as one of the greatest writers and intellectuals of the 20th and 21st centuries.

Wedding traditions
The dress of the Muslim bride is characterized by its elegance and transparency, in that of the Catholic one can see full colors. The Catholic bride's dress is characterized by its picturesque effects and harmony. There are two types of Muslim wedding dresses. One is worked on a "shajak" (large piece of wool) and with floral motives worked with "gajtan" (kind of rope) black cotton, sometimes mixed with green. The other one is worked in the same material but with red color. Different from the first here the motifs are enriched with full colors. The difference between this two dresses that at the first dress the motifs occupy all the area, at the second it occupies a little part in the front and back. These dresses have a belt worked with gold and grain necklaces in red, rose, orange creating all together a warm surface. Here the motifs are very small.

Dress of Catholic Shkodran Bride
The dress is tripped from the transparent white, shiny, soft, which spreads all over the body, and is intended to suggest tranquility and a warm purity. This concept of tradition is achieved through the white of the base material and the gold thread over. This dress is composed by the "barnaveke": some kind of very long pants which seem a skirt.

Paja
Ritual songs name various elements which contain "paja" (pronounced paya) of the girl, which are the goods parents give to the daughter to wear, to furnish the house, gifts for her husband and the intimate cousins. Elements are typically made by weaving clothes using looms. The preparation of the "paja" for the parents of the bride is a pleasure which means also accomplishing the obligations toward the daughter.

Dhuntia
"Dhunti" in Shkodra means the gifts that the groom prepares for the bride during the engagement, mainly clothes, jewelry, gold ornaments and tricks, which are sent to her a few days before the wedding.
In addition to those received by the family of his father, the bride takes many gifts from the groom and his family. "Dhuntia", which had a considerable monetary value, was prepared with great care by the family of the boy, because in some way embodied respect and love for his young bride, to whom these gifts were made, love for their son that he married at the same time was also a representation of the family in its economic and aesthetic. In "dhunti" there were enough clothes and items for use at all times, in joy and in sorrow, which expressed particular attention to the role of women.

Sports
Sport is a popular culture activity in Albania and really popular amongst the population. Albanians participate in several sporting activities since the 19th century.

Football
Association football is the most popular sport in Albania. It dates back to before the early 20th century.
The Football Association of Albania was founded in June 1930. It was accepted as a FIFA member in 1932 and was a UEFA founding member in 1954.

See also
History of Albania
Geography of Albania
National symbols of Albania
Albanisation
Albanian language
Illyrian language
Messapian language
Coffee culture
Bread and salt
Albanophilia
Cultural heritage of Albania

References
External links
Ministry of Culture of Albania
National Library of Albania
48 Albanian Proverbs
Books about Albania and the Albanian people (scribd.com) Reference of books (and some journal articles) about Albania and the Albanian people; their history, language, origin, culture, literature, etc. Public domain books, fully accessible online.

## Cuisine of Albania
Albanian cuisine is a representative of the cuisine of the Mediterranean. It is also an example of the Mediterranean diet based on the importance of olive oil, fruits, vegetables, and fish. The cooking traditions of the Albanian people are diverse in consequence of the environmental factors that are more importantly suitable for the cultivation of nearly every kind of herbs, vegetables, and fruits. Olive oil is the most ancient and commonly used vegetable fat in Albanian cooking, produced since antiquity throughout the country particularly along the coasts.
Hospitality is a fundamental custom of Albanian society and serving food is integral to the hosting of guests and visitors. It is not infrequent for visitors to be invited to eat and drink with locals. The medieval Albanian code of honor, called besa, resulted to look after guests and strangers as an act of recognition and gratitude.
Albanian cuisine can be divided into three major regional cuisines. The cuisine of the northern region has a rural, coastal and mountainous origin. Meat, fish and vegetables are central to the cuisine of the northern region. The people there use many kinds of ingredients that usually grow in the region, including potatoes, carrots, maize, beans, and cabbage, and also cherries, walnuts and almonds. Garlic and onions are as well important components to the local cuisine and added to almost every dish.
The cuisine of the central region is threefold of rural, mountainous and coastal. The central region is the flattest and rich in vegetation and biodiversity as well as culinary specialties. It has Mediterranean characteristics due to its proximity to the sea, which is rich in fish. Dishes here include several meat specialties and desserts of all kinds.
In the south, the cuisine is composed of two components:  the rural products of the field including dairy products, citrus fruits and olive oil, and coastal products, i.e. seafood. Those regions are particularly conducive to raising animals, as pastures and feed resources are abundant.
Besides garlic, onions are arguably the country's most widely used ingredient. Albania is ranked fifth in the world in terms of onion consumption per capita.

History
Albanian cuisine is strongly influenced by the country's geography and history, and draws inspiration from the Mediterranean, Ottoman, and Balkan culinary traditions.

Illyrian era
Albania’s culinary heritage is traced back to the Illyrian era (900 BCE-600 CE), when the diet primarily consisted of grains, legumes, wild herbs, and dairy products. The area's ample arable lands and its Mediterranean climate allowed for the cultivation of wheat, which became a staple in the diet. The Romans brought grapes, olives and staples when they took hold of the area in the 2nd century CE.

Byzantine and Ottoman influence
Albania's absorption into the Byzantine Empire (395-1347) introduced dishes with typical Mediterranean ingredients, including olive oil, seafood, and a variety of herbs. Following the Ottoman conquest in the 15th century, Albanian cuisine integrated Turkish elements. Dishes such as byrek (savory pie), baklava, and kebabs became staples of the Albanian diet. The use of spices including cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg, as well as rice-based dishes like pilaf, became prominent during this period.

Post World War II
After the war, Albanian cuisine began to incorporate staples from its northern neighbor Yugoslavia, especially ajvar, a relish composed of eggplant, roasted red peppers, and various herbs and spices. 
The local cuisine underwent significant changes during the 45-year authoritarian Communist rule of Enver Hoxha (1945-1990), during which draconian measures to maintain political control and promote economic self-sufficiency saw the rationing of food supplies, a prohibition of fishing, and a widespread decline in beef and dairy consumption. 
The regime attempted to "collectivize" all regional Albanian cuisines and blur localized differences through the promotion of a singular national cuisine that emphasized simplicity and thrift. Since the end of Communist rule, new generations of Albanians have tried to revive traditional cuisine elements and popularize recipes of dishes that were discouraged by the Hoxha regime.

Characteristics and meals
Albania's location in the western Balkan Peninsula and on the Mediterranean Sea has impactfully contributed to the local cuisine. Many foods that are common in the Mediterranean Basin, such as olives, wheat, chickpeas, dairy products, fish, fruits, and vegetables, are prominent in the Albanian cooking tradition. Albania has a distinctly Mediterranean climate. Across the country, a range of microclimates due to differing soil types and topography allows a variety of products to be grown. Citrus fruits such as oranges, lemons, figs and olives thrive.

Every region has its own typical breakfast. Breakfast is generally light. Bread is common, served with butter, cheese, jam and yogurt, and accompanied with olives, coffee, milk, tea or raki. Tarhana (tarhana), a soup composed of wheat and fermented milk, is also a common breakfast in many rural areas. It is common to have only fruit or a slice of bread and a cup of coffee or tea for breakfast. Coffee and tea are enjoyed both in homes and in cafés.
Lunch is traditionally the biggest meal of the day, for everyone from school children to shop workers and government officials. In the past, people went home to have lunch with their families, but it is now common to have lunch with friends at restaurants or cafeterias. Lunch sometimes consists of gjellë, a main dish of slowly cooked meat with various vegetables, accompanied by a salad of fresh vegetables, such as tomatoes, cucumbers, green peppers, onions and olives. Salads are typically served with meat dishes and are dressed with salt, olive oil, white vinegar or lemon juice. Grilled or fried vegetables and sausages and various forms of omelettes are also eaten. Common beverages are coffee, tea, fruit juices and milk.
Supper in Albania is a smaller meal, often consisting only of a variety of breads, meat, fresh fish or seafood, cheese, eggs and various kinds of vegetables, similar to breakfast, and sandwiches.

Ingredients
Located in Southern Europe with a direct proximity to the Mediterranean Sea, the Albanian cuisine features a wide range of fresh fruits, growing naturally in the fertile Albanian soil and under the warm sun. In consideration of being an agricultural country, Albania is a significant fruit importer and exporter. Besides citrus fruits, cherries, strawberries, blueberries and raspberries are among the most cultivated fruits. Many Albanians keep fruit trees in their yards. Fresh and dried fruits are eaten as snacks and desserts.
Fruits that are traditionally associated with Albanian cuisine include apple, grape, olive, orange, nectarine, blackberry, cherry, persimmon, pomegranate, figs, watermelon, avocado, lemon, peach, plum, strawberries, raspberry, mulberry and cornelian cherry.

A wide variety of vegetables are frequently used in Albanian cooking. Due to the different climate and soil conditions across Albania, cultivars of cabbages, turnips, beetroots, beans, potatoes, leeks and mushrooms can be found in a rich variety. Dried or pickled vegetables are also processed, especially in drier or colder regions such as in the remote Albanian Alps, where fresh vegetables were hard to get out of season. Particularly used vegetables include onion, garlic, tomato, cucumber, carrot, pepper, spinach, lettuce, grape leaves, bean, eggplant and zucchini.

Herbs are very popular. A wide variety are readily available at supermarkets or local produce stands across the country. The proximity to the Mediterranean Sea and the ideal climatic conditions allows the cultivation of about 250 aromatic and medical plants. Albania is among the leading producers and exporter of herbs in the world. Further, the country is a worldwide significant producer of oregano, thyme, sage, salvia, rosemary and yellow gentian. The most commonly used herbs and other seasonings in Albanian cooking include artichoke, basil, chili pepper, cinnamon, coriander, lavender, oregano, peppermint, rosemary, thyme, bay, vanilla, and saffron.

Drinks
Tea is a widely consumed beverage throughout Albania and particularly served at cafés, restaurants or at home. The country is rich in the cultivation of a wide range of herbs. The most popular varieties of tea drinking in Albania include Albanian-style mountain tea, which grows in the Albanian mountains and villages, and Russian- and Turkish-style black tea with sugar to tea with lemon, milk or honey.
Coffee is another popular beverage in Albania, but more particularly in the cities and villages. There are various varieties of coffee popular in Albania, such as espresso, cappuccino, macchiato, mocha and latte. As Albania was formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, coffee in the Turkish style is also common. Filter coffee and instant coffee are also available. Cafés are found everywhere in urban areas and function as meeting places for socializing and conducting business. Almost all serve baked goods and sandwiches and many also serve light meals. Tirana is particularly well known for its café culture.

In 2016, Albania surpassed Spain by becoming the country with the most coffee houses per capita in the world. In fact, there are 654 coffee houses per 100,000 inhabitants in Albania, a country with only 2.5 million inhabitants.
Dhallë is a traditional and healthy yogurt-based drink in Albania made by blending yogurt with water or milk and spices. It is especially popular during the summer month and it may be served with salt, according to taste.
Boza is a malt drink made from maize (corn) and wheat which is widely consumed with desserts in Albania.

Raki is the most popular spirit in Albania. It is considered as the national spirit beverage of the country. The most common types of raki in the country are grape, plum or blackberry. It is commonly served to the older people and is heated and sweetened with honey or sugar, with added spices. Although in the south of the country, Raki rigoni is very popular among the people and is made of white oregano, that is cultivated in the region.
Albania is traditionally a wine-drinking country. The people of Albania drink wine in moderation and almost always at meals or social occasions. Albanians drink about 5.83 liters of wine per person per year, which has been increasing since the Albanian production of high-quality wine grows to meet demand. The origins of wine production in Albania can be traced back to 6,000 years and evidence suggesting wine production confirm that Albania is among the earliest wine producers in Europe.

Pastries and desserts
There is a strong tradition of home baking in the country and pâtisseries are present in every city and village across the country. Entirely Albanian desserts and pastries consist primarily of fruits including oranges and lemons that grow as well as in the country. Traditionally, fresh fruits are often eaten after a meal as a dessert. Those dishes are inspired from both Western and Eastern civilizations.

Kanojët is a typical Sicilian pastry and very common among the Arbëreshë people, who brought the recipe for the pastry back to their Albanian homeland, where it remains popular to this day.. It is made of tube-shaped shells of fried pastry dough, filled with a sweet, creamy filling usually containing ricotta. The kanojët from Piana degli Albanesi, an Arbëreshë village, are often referred to as the best cannolo.
Baklava is made frequently in Albania, especially around certain religious holidays of Muslims, Catholics and Orthodox. It is prepared on large trays and cut into a variety of shapes. Baklava is made either with hazelnuts or walnuts sweetened with syrup.
Petulla is a traditional fried dough made from wheat or buckwheat flour, which is served with powdered sugar or feta cheese and raspberry jam.
Pandispanjë is a traditional base for several Albanian desserts and cakes based on flour, sugar, butter and eggs. A variety of fillings are used, such as jelly, chocolate, fruit and pastry cream.

Ballokume is an Albanian cookie, which originated in Elbasan during the Middle Ages and is prepared every year on Summer Day, a public holiday in the country. It has to be brewed in large copper pots, tightly whipped with a wooden spoon and baked in a wood oven.
Fruit jam, also known as reçel, is enjoyed all year in Albania and a major component of the Albanian cooking tradition. The fruit preserve is made by cooking the juice of the fruit, or the fruit itself, with sugar. It is served with many dishes as a side dish.
Zupa is a popular dessert and assembled by alternating layers of cookies or sponge cake with pastry cream. A similar dessert is an Albanian custard dessert called krem karamele, very similar to crème brûlée. This dessert is made with milk, cream, egg yolks, sugar, and vanilla and flavored with orange or lemon zest and cinnamon.

Various kinds of hallvë are prepared across the country with some of the most common types being flour halva, although home-cooked semolina halva and shop-produced sesame halva are also consumed. It is a typical sweet in local religious fairs around Albania.
Tambëloriz, also known as sultjash, is a popular sweet among the Albanian population across the world. It is a kind of rice pudding made from milk, rice, and cinnamon; nuts and raisins may be added.
Tollumba is a fried, crispy, and sweet dessert traditionally eaten in the Balkan Peninsula. It is made of bits of fried dough, similar to doughnuts, steeped in lemony syrup. The dough contains starch and semolina, which keeps it light and crispy.

Akullore is the Albanian word for ice cream and it is enjoyed in both summer and winter.
Kadaif is a pastry made from long thin noodle threads filled with walnuts or pistachios and sweetened with syrup; it is sometimes served alongside baklava.
Kabuni is a traditional cold-served Albanian dessert made of rice fried in butter, mutton broth, raisins, salt and caramelized sugar. It is then boiled before sugar, cinnamon, and ground cloves are added.

Pastashu is made from choux pastry, filled with a cream, vanilla, coffee or chocolate-flavoured custard and then topped usually with fondant icing. This dessert is known as éclair in France and bignè in Italy.
Trileçe is an Albanian adaptation of the Latin American tres leches cake. It is a sponge cake made of three milks from cow, goat and water buffaloes, while cow's milk and cream are used commonly. According to Hürriyet, Albania was the first country to introduce the dessert from America into the area. It is believed that the popularity of Latin American soap operas in Albania led local chefs to reverse-engineer the dessert and then the speciality spread over to Turkey.
Ashure, the world's oldest dessert, is served especially during Muslim (Bektashi) holidays in Albania. It is a congee that is made of a mixture consisting of grains, nuts as well as fruits and dried fruits.

Appetizers and salads
Popular appetizers in Albania include wheat bread or cornbread. Bread remains one of the most important foods and is ever-present on the Albanian table. The expression for 'going to eat a meal' (Albanian: për të ngrënë bukë) can be literally translated as 'going to eat bread'. In Albania, bread is part of the authentic Albanian hospitality saying of "bread, salt and heart" (bukë, kripë e zemër).
Vegetable salads are almost always served along with both lunch and dinner, which largely consist of dishes based on meat. Ingredients routinely used in salads are green or red peppers, onions, tomatoes, olives and cucumbers. Salads representative of Albanian cuisine are dressed with salt, olive oil or lemon and vinegar. The usual dressings are based on garlic, lemon and black pepper.

An Albanian-style meze of fresh and cooked vegetable salads, pickled cucumbers and other vegetables, hard-boiled eggs, prosciutto, salami and feta cheese, accompanied with roasted bell peppers, olive oil and garlic, is served at festive meals and in restaurants. Contemporary Albanian meze include a combination of traditional and modern appetizers.
Fërgesë verore (summer fërgesë) is the vegetarian version of fërgesë, a national dish in Albania made of green and red peppers, and sometimes eggs, along with skinned tomatoes and onions and often served as a side dish to various meat dishes.
Japrak is a stuffed vegetable dish made with grape leaves, olive oil and stuffed with rice, grilled beef and chopped onions, and generally served cold with bread and tarator.

Tarator is a cold appetizer and usually served cold as a side dish during the hot summer months. The ingredients of tarator include cucumber, garlic, olive oil, salt and yoghurt. Fried and grilled vegetables and seafood are usually offered with tarator.
Large white kidney beans (fasulle plaqi) are a typical appetizer or side dish, baked in an earthen pot with tomatoes, onions, peppermint, oregano, bay leaves and black pepper.
A variety of soups are enjoyed, particularly in the winter. Especially popular soups are potato, cabbage, bean and fish soups. Trahana (tarhana), a soup composed of wheat and fermented milk, is commonly consumed in Albania as well as other areas of the Eastern Mediterranean, often - as noted above - consumed at breakfast. Other dishes include groshët and shqeto, which originated from the Lunxheri region of Gjirokastër.
Other dishes include mëlci pule, eggplant appetizers, panaret (which is famous among Arbëreshës), stuffed peppers composed of green peppers stuffed with rice, meat, other vegetables and herbs, turshi lakre, fried sardele me limon, papare, which are bread leftovers cooked with water, egg, butter, and gjizë (salted curd cheese) and bread and cheese referred as bukë me djathë.

Meat and fish
The country's cuisine is largely meat-based. Beef and veal are the most commonly consumed meats in Albania, followed by pork. Albania has many small eateries specializing in beef and lamb, goat and veal. In high elevation localities, smoked meat and pickled preserves are common. Animal organs are also used in dishes such as intestines and the head among other parts, which are considered a delicacy.

Fresh fish is readily available and caught off the coastal areas of the Adriatic and Ionian Sea inside the Mediterranean Sea but also from the Lake Butrint, Lake Shkodër, Lake Ohrid, Lake Prespa as well as Karavasta Lagoon, Narta Lagoon and Patos Lagoon. Fresh fish is served whole, in the Mediterranean style, grilled, boiled, fried whole or in slices, dressed only with freshly squeezed lemon juice. Fish dishes are often flavoured with white vinegar and virgin olive oil, which particularly grows in Southern Albania.
Albanians living in the coastal cities, especially in Durrës, Sarandë and Vlorë are passionate about their seafood specialties. Popular seafood dishes include trout, calamari, octopus, cuttlefish, red mullet, sea bass, gilt-head bream and others. Baked whiting, carp, mullet or eel with olive oil and garlic are also widely consumed in the country.

Fërgesë is the most iconic dish from Tirana and Central Albania. It consists of peppers, tomatoes, onions and gjizë (Albanian ricotta). Ingredients are cooked on the stove and then in the oven to make a relatively dense sauce. Some versions of the dish include liver or cooked beef. Fërgesë with liver is considered more traditional in Tirana and is thus sometimes called just fërgesë tirane.

Tavë kosi is a national dish in Albania that is beloved throughout the country. The speciality is a simple dish of baked lamb and rice, served with a flavored yogurt sauce. Recently, it has become very popular among the Greeks and Turks associated with the large Albanian diaspora in Greece and Turkey.
Qebapa are small homemade grilled meat skinless sausages made of lamb and beef mix. They are primarily served with onions, sour cream, ajvar and pita bread called pitalka.

Gullash, or tasqebap, is  eaten very frequently in the mountainous areas of Albania. It is a traditional paprika-spiced meat stew originating in Hungary that is popular throughout Central Europe and the Balkans.
Gjel deti me përshesh (turkey with përshesh) is a common New Year's dish in many Albanian families and also consumed in other celebrations. The turkey is first boiled and then roasted and served with përshesh, which is prepared by baking pieces of kulaç (a kind of bread) with turkey broth, along with mint and other spices.
Paçe is traditionally common in Albania. It is made with a sheep's, pig's or any cattle's head, boiled until meat comes off easily. It is then stewed with garlic, onion, black pepper and vinegar. Sometimes a little flour is added to thicken the stew.
Proshute is a term used in Albania for many types of salami and ham, which has been seasoned, cured and air-dried. It is served rather at breakfast or lunch as an appetizer. Dishes which consist of proshute include omelete me proshute dhe djathe, role buke me proshute and sallate orizi me pjeper dhe proshute.
Qofte are fried meatballs, which are usually made of minced meat, herbs and spices and cooked with tomato sauce and vegetables or beans. Throughout the country there are few specialized shops called qofteri, which offer qofte and beer.

Pies
Pite is considered as well one of the national foods of Albania by most Albanians.  Several internationally renowned musicians of Albanian heritage such as Rita Ora, Dua Lipa and Action Bronson publicized their passion for this Albanian dish.

It is often served hot, fresh and with pickled vegetables, honey, yogurt or fruit jam. Nowadays, flia mainly features in large social gatherings, weddings, births and other ceremonies and events. Fli is a dish mainly cooked in Kosovo. The dishes may differ depending on the region of Albania. Fli is made carefully and in a different way with a specific type of charcoal lid.
Bakllasarëm is a layered pie, otherwise known as pite, without anything inside, which is covered with yogurt and garlic and then heated again. It is particularly eaten for lunch. Another popular dish is kungullur, which is made of filo pastry layers filled with mashed pumpkin, butter, salt, or sugar.

Notable pies include byrek, pepeq, shaprak, qollopita or lakror. Lakror is a pie that has layers of dough thinner than a byrek and it is traditionally cooked on embers, covered with a metal semispherical lid. Common fillings are leek and gjizë or tomato and onion. It is a specialty of Southern Albanian regions, like Lunxheri or Korça.

Health effects
Albanian cuisine is classified as part of the "Mediterranean diet," which includes a high consumption of seafood, vegetables, fruit, nuts, and olive oil; however, beef, veal, lamb, and pork are commonly consumed as well. It is believed that because of this diet Albania has a very high life expectancy when its economic power is compared to other countries, characterized by some researchers as the "Albanian paradox".

See also

Arbëreshë cuisine
Kosovan cuisine
Cham cuisine


== References ==

## List of museums in Albania
This is a list of museums in Albania. In 2017, museums in the country welcomed 200,986 visitors. Most museums are closed on Mondays.

List of museums in Albania
Archaeological museums
National Archaeological Museum
Archaeological Museum of Durrës
Archaeological Museum of Butrint
Archaeological Museum of Apolonia
Archaeological Museum of Korçë
Archaeological Museum of Lezhë
Archaeological Museum of Saranda
Museum of Kamenica Tumulus

Ethnographic museums
Ethnographic Museum of Berat
Ethnographic Museum of Krujë
Ethnographic Museum of Elbasan
Ethnographic Museum of Vlorë
Ethnographic Museum of Durrës
Ethnographic Museum of Kukës
Ethnographic Museum of Gjirokastër
Ethnographic Museum of Kavajë
Museum of Rozafa Castle

History museums
National History Museum
Skanderbeg Museum
Congress of Lushnjë Museum
National Museum of Education
Museum of National Independence
History Museum of Shkodër
History Museum of Fier
History Museum of Lushnjë
Historical Relics Museum of Vlorë
Memorial Museum of Skanderbeg
History Museum of Mat
Museum of Pogradec
Museum of Gramsh
Bunk'Art 1
Bunk'Art 2
Museum of Secret Surveillance
Communist Crimes Museum
Museum of LANÇ
Armed Forces Museum
Kastrioti Museum of Sinë
Woman's Museum
Hebrew Museum

Arts museums
National Museum of Fine Arts
Marubi National Museum of Photography
National Museum of Medieval Art
Bratko Museum of Oriental Art
Onufri Iconographic Museum
Mezuraj Museum
Gjon Mili Museum
Home of Poliphony

Collections museums
Natural Sciences Museum
Bank of Albania Museum
Museum of Albanian Stamp
National Guard Museum
National Armaments Museum
Clocks Museum
Kadare Studio Home

Cult museums
Sapa Diocese Museum
Shkodër-Pult Diocese Museum
Bektashi Museum

See also
List of libraries in Albania
List of archives in Albania
List of art galleries in Albania
List of museums by country


== References ==