--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Luxembourg
FILE_NAME: country_luxembourg.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:47:31
----------------

# Luxembourg

## General Overview
Luxembourg,  officially the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, is a landlocked country in Western Europe. It is bordered by Belgium to the west and north, Germany to the east, and France to the south and west. Its capital and most populous city, Luxembourg City, is one of the four institutional seats of the European Union and hosts several EU institutions, notably the Court of Justice of the European Union, the highest judicial authority in the EU.
As part of the Low Countries, Luxembourg has close historic, political, and cultural ties to Belgium and the Netherlands. Luxembourg's culture, people, and languages are greatly influenced by France and Germany: Luxembourgish, a Germanic language, is the only recognized national language of the Luxembourgish people and of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg; French is the sole language for legislation; and both languages along with German are used for administrative matters.
With an area of 2,586 square kilometres (998 sq mi), Luxembourg is Europe's seventh-smallest country. In 2026, it had a population of 693,916, which makes it one of the least-populated countries in Europe, albeit with the highest population growth rate; foreign nationals account for almost half the population. Luxembourg is a representative democracy headed by a constitutional monarch, Grand Duke Guillaume V, making it the world's only remaining sovereign grand duchy.
The County of Luxembourg was established in the 11th century as a state within the Holy Roman Empire. Its ascension culminated in its monarch, Henry VII, becoming the Holy Roman Emperor in the 14th century. Luxembourg came under Habsburg rule in the 15th century, and was annexed by France in the 18th century. Luxembourg was partitioned three times, reducing its size. Having been restored in 1815 after the defeat of Napoleon, it regained independence in 1867 after the Luxembourg Crisis.
Luxembourg is a developed country with an advanced economy and one of the world's highest PPP-adjusted GDPs per capita, per the IMF and World Bank. It also ranks highly in terms of life expectancy, human development, and human rights. The historic city of Luxembourg was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994 due to the exceptional preservation of its vast fortifications and historic quarters. Luxembourg is a founding member of the European Union, OECD, the United Nations, NATO, and the Benelux. It served on the United Nations Security Council for the first time in 2013 and 2014.

History
Before AD 963
The first traces of settlement in what is now Luxembourg are dated back to the Palaeolithic Age, about 35,000 years ago. From the 6th century BC, Celtic tribes settled in the region between the rivers Rhine and Meuse.
Six centuries later, the Romans named the Celtic tribes inhabiting these exact regions collectively as the Treveri. Many examples of archaeological evidence proving their existence in Luxembourg have been discovered, the most famous being the Oppidum of Titelberg.
In around 58 to 51 BC, the Romans invaded the country when Julius Caesar conquered Gaul and part of Germania up to the Rhine border, thus the area of what is now Luxembourg became part of the Roman Empire for the next 450 years, living in relative peace under the Pax Romana.
Similar to those in Gaul, the Celts of Luxembourg adopted Roman culture, language, morals and a way of life, effectively becoming what historians later described as Gallo-Roman civilization. Evidence from that period includes the Dalheim Ricciacum and the Vichten mosaic, on display at the National Museum of History and Art in Luxembourg City.
The territory was infiltrated by the Germanic Franks from the 4th century, and was abandoned by Rome in AD 406, after which it became part of the Kingdom of the Franks. The Salian Franks who settled in the area are often described as the ones having brought the Germanic language to present-day Luxembourg, since the old Frankish language spoken by them is considered by linguists to be a direct forerunner of the Moselle Franconian dialect, which later evolved into, among others, the modern-day Luxembourgish language.
The Christianization of Luxembourg is usually dated back to the end of the 7th century. The most famous figure in this context is Willibrord, a Northumbrian missionary saint, who together with other monks established the Abbey of Echternach in AD 698, and is celebrated annually in the dancing procession of Echternach. For a few centuries the abbey would become one of northern Europe's most influential. The Codex Aureus of Echternach, an important surviving codex written entirely in gold ink, was produced here in the 11th century. The so-called Emperor's Bible and the Golden Gospels of Henry III were also produced in Echternach at this time.

Emergence and expansion (963–1312)
When the Carolingian Empire was divided many times starting with the Treaty of Verdun in 843, today's Luxembourgish territory became successively part of the Kingdom of Middle Francia (843–855), the Kingdom of Lotharingia (855–959) and finally of the Duchy of Lorraine (959–1059), which itself had become a state of the Holy Roman Empire.
The recorded history of Luxembourg begins with the acquisition of Lucilinburhuc (today Luxembourg Castle) situated on the Bock rock by Siegfried, Count of the Ardennes, in 963 through an exchange act with St. Maximin's Abbey, Trier. Around this fort, a town gradually developed, which became the centre of a state of great strategic value within the Duchy of Lorraine. Over the years, the fortress was extended by Siegfried's descendants and by 1083, one of them, Conrad I, was the first to call himself a "Count of Luxembourg", and with it effectively creating the independent County of Luxembourg (which was still a state within the Holy Roman Empire).
By the middle of the 13th century, the counts of Luxembourg had managed to gain considerable wealth and power and had expanded their territory from the river Meuse to the Moselle. By the time of the reign of Henry V the Blonde, Bitburg, La Roche-en-Ardenne, Durbuy, Arlon, Thionville, Marville, Longwy, and in 1264 the competing County of Vianden (and with it St Vith and Schleiden) had either been incorporated directly or become vassal states to the County of Luxembourg. The only major setback during their rise in power came in 1288, when Henry VI and his three brothers died at the Battle of Worringen while trying unsuccessfully to add the Duchy of Limburg to their realm. But despite the defeat, the Battle of Worringen helped the Counts of Luxembourg to achieve military glory, which they had previously lacked, as they had mostly enlarged their territory by means of inheritances, marriages and fiefdoms.
The ascension of the Counts of Luxembourg culminated when Henry VII became King of the Romans, King of Italy and finally, in 1312, Holy Roman Emperor.

Golden Age (1312–1443)
With the ascension of Henry VII as Emperor, the dynasty of the House of Luxembourg not only began to rule the Holy Roman Empire, but rapidly began to exercise growing influence over other parts of Central Europe as well.
Henry's son, John the Blind, in addition to being Count of Luxembourg, also became King of Bohemia. He remains a major figure in Luxembourgish history and folklore and is considered by many historians the epitome of chivalry in mediaeval times. He is also known for having founded the Schueberfouer in 1340 and for his heroic death at the Battle of Crécy in 1346. John the Blind is considered a national hero in Luxembourg.
In the 14th and early 15th centuries, three more members of the House of Luxembourg reigned as Holy Roman Emperors and Bohemian Kings: John's descendants Charles IV, Sigismund (who also was King of Hungary and Croatia), and Wenceslaus IV. Charles IV created the long-lasting Golden Bull of 1356, a decree which fixed important aspects of the constitutional structure of the Empire. Luxembourg remained an independent fief (county) of the Holy Roman Empire, and in 1354, Charles IV elevated it to the status of a duchy with his half-brother Wenceslaus I becoming the first Duke of Luxembourg. While his kin were occupied ruling and expanding their power within the Holy Roman Empire and elsewhere, Wenceslaus, annexed the County of Chiny in 1364, and with it, the territories of the new Duchy of Luxembourg reached its greatest extent.
During these 130 years, the House of Luxembourg was contending with the House of Habsburg for supremacy within the Holy Roman Empire and Central Europe. It all came to end in 1443, when the House of Luxembourg suffered a succession crisis, precipitated by the lack of a male heir to assume the throne. Since Sigismund and Elizabeth of Görlitz were both heirless, all possessions of the Luxembourg Dynasty were redistributed among the European aristocracy. The Duchy of Luxembourg become a possession of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy.
As the House of Luxembourg had become extinct and Luxembourg now became part of the Burgundian Netherlands, this would mark the start of nearly 400 years of foreign rule over Luxembourg.

Habsburg rule and French invasions (1444–1794)
In 1482, Philip the Handsome inherited all of what became then known as the Habsburg Netherlands, and with it the Duchy of Luxembourg. For nearly 320 years Luxembourg would remain a possession of the mighty House of Habsburg, at first under Austrian rule (1506–1556), then under Spanish rule (1556–1714), before going back again to Austrian rule (1714–1794).
With having become a Habsburg possession, the Duchy of Luxembourg became, like many countries in Europe at the time, heavily involved in the many conflicts for dominance of Europe between the Habsburg-held countries and the Kingdom of France.
In 1542, the King of France, François I, invaded Luxembourg twice, but the Habsburgs under Charles V managed to reconquer the Duchy each time.
Luxembourg became part of the Spanish Netherlands in 1556, and when France and Spain went to war in 1635 it resulted in the Treaty of the Pyrenees, in which the first partition of Luxembourg was decided. Under the Treaty, Spain ceded the Luxembourgish fortresses of Stenay, Thionville, and Montmédy, and the surrounding territory to France, effectively reducing the size of Luxembourg for the first time in centuries.
In context of the Nine Years' War in 1684, France invaded Luxembourg again, conquering and occupying the Duchy until 1697 when it was returned to the Spanish to garner support for the Bourbon cause during the prelude to the War of the Spanish Succession. When the war broke out in 1701 Luxembourg and the Spanish Netherlands were administered by the pro-French faction under the governor Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria and sided with the Bourbons. The duchy was subsequently occupied by the pro-Austrian allied forces during the conflict and was awarded to Austria at its conclusion in 1714.
As the Duchy of Luxembourg repeatedly passed back and forth from Spanish and Austrian to French rule, each of the conquering nations contributed to strengthening and expanding the Fortress that the Castle of Luxembourg had become over the years. One example of this includes French military engineer Marquis de Vauban who advanced the fortifications around and on the heights of the city, fortification walls that are still visible today.

French rule (1794–1815)
During the War of the First Coalition, Revolutionary France invaded the Austrian Netherlands, and with it, Luxembourg. In the years 1793 and 1794 most of the Duchy was conquered relatively quickly and the French Revolutionary Army committed many atrocities and pillages against the Luxembourgish civilian population and abbeys, the most infamous being the massacres of Differdange and Dudelange, as well as the destruction of the abbeys of Clairefontaine, Echternach and Orval. However the Fortress of Luxembourg resisted for nearly 7 months before the Austrian forces holding it surrendered. Luxembourg's long defence led Lazare Carnot to call Luxembourg "the best fortress in the world, except Gibraltar", giving rise to the city's nickname the Gibraltar of the North.
Luxembourg was annexed by France, becoming the département des forêts (department of forests), and the incorporation of the former Duchy as a département into France was formalized at the Treaty of Campo Formio in 1797.
From the start of the occupation the new French officials in Luxembourg, who spoke only French, implemented many republican reforms, among them the principle of laicism, which led to an outcry in strongly Catholic Luxembourg. Additionally French was implemented as the only official language and Luxembourgish people were barred access to all civil services. When the French Army introduced military duty for the local population, riots broke out which culminated in 1798 when Luxembourgish peasants started a rebellion. Even though the French managed to rapidly suppress this revolt called Klëppelkrich, it had a profound effect on the historical memory of the country and its citizens.
However, many republican ideas of this era continue to have a lasting effect on Luxembourg; one of the many examples features the implementation of the Napoleonic Code Civil which was introduced in 1804 and is still valid today.

National awakening (1815–1890)
After the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, the Congress of Vienna decided to restore the Duchy of Luxembourg. However, as the territory had been part of the Holy Roman Empire as well as the Habsburgian Netherlands in the past, both the Kingdom of Prussia and the newly formed United Kingdom of the Netherlands, which included both the present Kingdom of the Netherlands and Belgium, now claimed possession of the territory. Thus the great powers decided that Luxembourg would become a member state of the newly formed German Confederation, but at the same time would be joined with the Netherlands in personal union under King William I of the Netherlands, the son of the last Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic, William V, Prince of Orange. To satisfy Prussia, it was decided that not only would the Fortress of Luxembourg be manned by Prussian troops, but also that large parts of Luxembourgish territory (mainly the areas around Bitburg and St. Vith) would become Prussian possessions. This marked the second time that the Duchy of Luxembourg was reduced in size and is generally known as the Second Partition of Luxembourg. To compensate the Duchy for this loss, it was decided to elevate the Duchy to a Grand Duchy, thus giving the Dutch monarchs the additional title of Grand Duke of Luxembourg. However, from 1816 to 1830, William I ignored the Duchy's sovereignty, treating Luxembourg as a conquered nation while subjecting Luxembourg to high taxes.
After Belgium became an independent country following the victorious Belgian Revolution of 1830–1831, it claimed the entire Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg as part of Belgium. However, neither the Dutch King, who was also Grand Duke of Luxembourg, nor Prussia wanted to lose their grip on the mighty fortress of Luxembourg. So, they did not agree with the Belgian claims. The dispute would be resolved at the 1839 Treaty of London, where the Third Partition of Luxembourg was decided. This time the territory was reduced by more than half, as the predominantly francophone western part of the country (but also the then Luxembourgish-speaking part of Arelerland) was transferred to the new Kingdom of Belgium under Leopold I of Belgium, thereby giving Luxembourg its modern-day borders. The treaty of 1839 also established full independence of the remaining Germanic-speaking Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg.
In 1842, Luxembourg joined the German Customs Union (Zollverein). This resulted in the opening of the German market, the development of Luxembourg's steel industry, and expansion of Luxembourg's railway network from 1855 to 1875.
After the Luxembourg Crisis of 1866 nearly led to war between Prussia and France, as both were unwilling to see the other taking influence over Luxembourg and its mighty fortress, the Grand Duchy's independence and neutrality were reaffirmed by the Second Treaty of London and Prussia was finally willing to withdraw its troops from the Fortress of Luxembourg under the condition that the fortifications would be dismantled. That happened the same year. At the time of the Franco-Prussian war in 1870, Luxembourg's neutrality was respected, and neither France nor Germany invaded the country.
As a result of the recurring disputes between the major European powers, the people of Luxembourg gradually developed a consciousness of independence and a national awakening took place in the 19th century. The people of Luxembourg began referring to themselves as Luxembourgers, rather than being part of one of the larger surrounding nations. This consciousness of Mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sinn ("We want to remain what we are") culminated in 1890, when the last step towards full independence was finally taken: due to a succession crisis the Dutch monarchy ceased to hold the title Grand-Duke of Luxembourg. Beginning with Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg, the Grand-Duchy would have its own monarchy, thus reaffirming its full independence.

German occupations and interwar political crisis (1890–1945)
In August 1914, during World War I, Imperial Germany violated Luxembourg's neutrality by invading it to defeat France. Nevertheless, despite the German occupation, Luxembourg was allowed to maintain much of its independence and political mechanisms. Unaware of the fact that Germany secretly planned to annex the Grand-Duchy in case of a German victory (the Septemberprogramm), the Luxembourgish government continued to pursue a policy of strict neutrality. However, the Luxembourgish population did not believe Germany had good intentions, fearing that it would annex Luxembourg. Around 1,000 Luxembourgers served in the French army; their sacrifices have been commemorated at the Gëlle Fra.
After the war, Grand-Duchess Marie-Adélaïde was seen by many people (including the French and Belgian governments) as having collaborated with the Germans and calls for her abdication and the establishment of a Republic became louder. After the retreat of the German army, communists in Luxembourg City and Esch-sur-Alzette tried to establish a soviet worker's republic similar to the ones emerging in Germany, but these attempts lasted only two days.
In November 1918, a motion in the Chamber of Deputies demanding the abolition of the monarchy was defeated narrowly by 21 votes to 19 (with three abstentions).
France questioned the Luxembourgish government's, and especially Marie-Adélaïde's, neutrality during the war, and calls for an annexation of Luxembourg to either France or Belgium grew louder in both countries. In January 1919, a company of the Luxembourgish Army rebelled, declaring itself to be the army of the new republic, but French troops intervened and put an end to the rebellion. Nonetheless, the disloyalty shown by her own armed forces was too much for Marie-Adélaïde, who abdicated in favour of her sister Charlotte 5 days later. The same year, in a popular referendum, 77.8% of the Luxembourgish population declared in favour of maintaining monarchy and rejected the establishment of a republic. During this time, Belgium pushed for an annexation of Luxembourg. However, all such claims were ultimately dismissed at the Paris Peace Conference, thus securing Luxembourg's independence.
In 1939, the Luxembourg army increased to 425 due to Nazi Germany presence. On 9 May 1940 Luxembourg closed the defensive Schuster Line with Germany; one day later, Luxembourg's neutrality was violated again when Nazi Germany's Wehrmacht entered the country "entirely without justification". In contrast to the First World War, under the German occupation of Luxembourg during World War II, the country was treated as German territory and informally annexed to the adjacent province of Nazi Germany, Gau Moselland. This time, Luxembourg did not remain neutral as Luxembourg's government in exile based in London supported the Allies, sending a small group of volunteers who participated in the Normandy invasion, and multiple resistance groups formed inside the occupied country.
With 2.45% of its prewar population killed, and a third of all buildings in Luxembourg being destroyed or heavily damaged (mainly due to the Battle of the Bulge), Luxembourg suffered the highest such loss in Western Europe, but its commitment to the Allied war effort was never questioned. Around 1,000–2,500 of Luxembourg's Jews were murdered in the Holocaust.

Integration into NATO and European Union (1945–present)
The Grand Duchy became a founding member of the United Nations in 1945. Luxembourg's neutral status under the constitution formally ended in 1948, and in April 1949 it also became a founding member of NATO. During the Cold War, Luxembourg continued its involvements on the side of the Western Bloc. In the early fifties a small contingent of troops fought in the Korean War.
Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan, to support ISAF.
In the 1950s, Luxembourg became one of the six founding countries of the European Communities, following the 1952 establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community, and subsequent 1958 creations of the European Economic Community and European Atomic Energy Community. In 1993, the former two of these were incorporated into the European Union. With Robert Schuman (one of the founding fathers of the EU), Pierre Werner (considered the father of the Euro), Gaston Thorn, Jacques Santer and Jean-Claude Juncker (all former presidents of the European Commission), Luxembourgish politicians contributed substantially to the EU's formation and establishment. In 1999, Luxembourg joined the eurozone. Thereafter, the country was elected non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (2013–14).
The steel industry exploiting the Red Lands' rich iron-ore grounds in the beginning of the 20th century drove Luxembourg's industrialization. After the decline of the steel industry in the 1970s, the country focused on establishing itself as a global financial centre and developed into a banking hub. Since the beginning of the 21st century, its governments have focused on developing the country into a knowledge economy, with the founding of the University of Luxembourg and a national space programme. In 2020, Luxembourg became the first country in the world to provide free public transport at a national scale.
On 19 December 2023, Luxembourg's Chamber of Deputies adopted a law to modernize the current investment tax credit. It took effect less than two weeks later on 1 January 2024.

Geography
Luxembourg is one of Europe's smallest countries, ranking 168th in size of the 194 independent countries of the world; it is about 2,586 square kilometres (998 sq mi) in size, measuring 82 km (51 mi) long and 57 km (35 mi) wide. It lies between latitudes 49° and 51° N, and longitudes 5° and 7° E.

To the east, Luxembourg borders the German Bundesländer of Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland, and to the south, it borders the French région of Grand Est (Lorraine). The Grand Duchy borders Belgium's Wallonia, in particular the Belgian provinces of Luxembourg and Liège, part of which comprises the German-speaking Community of Belgium, to the west and to the north, respectively.
The northern third of the country is known as the Éislek or Oesling, and forms part of the Ardennes. It is dominated by hills and low mountains, including the Kneiff near Wilwerdange, which is the highest point, at 560 metres (1,840 ft). Other mountains are the Buurgplaatz at 559 metres (1,834 ft) near Huldange and the Napoléonsgaard at 554 metres (1,818 ft) near Rambrouch. The region is sparsely populated, with only one town (Wiltz) with a population of more than five thousand people.
The southern two-thirds of the country is called the Guttland, and is more densely populated than the Éislek. It is also more diverse and can be divided into five geographic sub-regions. The Luxembourg plateau, in south-central Luxembourg, is a large, flat, sandstone formation, and the site of the city of Luxembourg. Little Switzerland, in the east of Luxembourg, has craggy terrain and thick forests. The Moselle valley is the lowest-lying region, running along the southeastern border. The Red Lands, in the far south and southwest, are Luxembourg's industrial heartland and home to many of Luxembourg's largest towns.
The border between Luxembourg and Germany is formed by three rivers: the Moselle, the Sauer, and the Our. Other major rivers are the Alzette, the Attert, the Clerve, and the Wiltz. The valleys of the mid-Sauer and Attert form the border between the Guttland and the Éislek.

Environment
According to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index, Luxembourg is one of the world's best performers in environmental protection, ranking fourth out of 132 assessed countries. In 2020, it ranked second out of 180 countries. Luxembourg also ranks sixth among the top ten most liveable cities in the world by Mercer's. The country wants to cut GHG emissions by 55% in 10 years and reach zero emissions by 2050. Luxembourg wants to increase its organic farming fivefold. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 1.12/10, ranking it 164th globally out of 172 countries.
In 2024, Luxembourg is ranked 2nd in Environmental Performance Index globally.

Climate
Luxembourg has an oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb), marked by high levels of precipitation, particularly in late summer. The summers are warm and winters cool.

Government and politics
Luxembourg is described as a "full democracy", with a parliamentary democracy headed by a constitutional monarch. Executive power is exercised by the grand duke and the cabinet, which consists of several members with the titles of minister, minister delegate or secretary of state, who are headed by a Prime Minister. The current Constitution of Luxembourg, the supreme law of Luxembourg, was originally adopted on 17 October 1868. The Constitution was last updated on 1 July 2023.
The grand duke has the power to dissolve the legislature, in which case new elections must be held within three months. But since 1919, sovereignty has resided with the nation, exercised by the grand duke in accordance with the Constitution and the law.

Legislative power is vested in the Chamber of Deputies, a unicameral legislature of sixty members, who are directly elected to five-year terms from four constituencies. A second body, the Council of State (Conseil d'État), composed of 21 members appointed by the grand duke, advises the Chamber of Deputies in the drafting of legislation.
Luxembourg has three lower tribunals (justices de paix; in Esch-sur-Alzette, the city of Luxembourg, and Diekirch), two district tribunals (Luxembourg and Diekirch), and a Superior Court of Justice (Luxembourg), which includes the Court of Appeal and the Court of Cassation. There is also an Administrative Tribunal and an Administrative Court, as well as a Constitutional Court, all of which are located in the capital.
According to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Luxembourg performs in the high range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in elected government, freedom of religion, and freedom of movement.

Administrative divisions
Luxembourg is divided into 12 cantons, which are further divided into 100 communes. Twelve of the communes have city status; the city of Luxembourg is the largest.

Foreign relations
Luxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In 1921, Luxembourg and Belgium formed the Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create a regime of inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs. Luxembourg is a member of the Benelux Economic Union and was one of the founding members of the European Economic Community (now the European Union). It also participates in the Schengen Group (named after the Luxembourg village of Schengen where the agreements were signed). At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy.
Luxembourg is considered a European capital, and is the site of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Court of Auditors, the European Investment Bank, the Statistical Office of the European Union (Eurostat) and other vital EU organs. The Secretariat of the European Parliament is located in Luxembourg, but the Parliament usually meets in Brussels and sometimes in Strasbourg. Luxembourg is also site of the EFTA Court, which is responsible for the three EFTA members who are part of the European Single Market through the EEA Agreement.

Military
The Luxembourgish army is mostly based in its casern, the Centre militaire Caserne Grand-Duc Jean on the Härebierg in Diekirch. The general staff is based in the capital, the État-Major. The army is under civilian control, with the grand duke as Commander-in-Chief. The Minister for Defence, Yuriko Backes, oversees army operations. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defence, who answers to the minister and holds the rank of general.
Being landlocked, Luxembourg has no navy. Seventeen NATO AWACS aeroplanes are registered as aircraft of Luxembourg. In accordance with a joint agreement with Belgium, both countries have put forth funding for one A400M military cargo plane.
Luxembourg has participated in the Eurocorps, has contributed troops to the UNPROFOR and IFOR missions in former Yugoslavia, and has participated with a small contingent in the NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan, to support ISAF. The army has also participated in humanitarian relief missions such as setting up refugee camps for Kurds and providing emergency supplies to Albania.

Human rights
Luxembourg is liberal on civil rights protections. In 2015, Luxembourg amended its marriage law to include same-sex couples. In 2026, Luxembourg became the second country in the world to enshrine abortion access within its constitution, following France in 2024.

Economy
Luxembourg's stable and high-income market economy features moderate growth, low inflation, and a high level of innovation. Unemployment is traditionally low, though it reached 6.1% by May 2012 after the Great Recession. In 2011, according to the IMF, Luxembourg was the world's second-richest country, with a per capita GDP on a purchasing-power parity (PPP) basis of $80,119; by 2023 it was ranked first. Its GDP per capita in purchasing power standards was 261% of the EU average (100%) in 2019. Luxembourg ranks 13th in The Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom, 26th in the United Nations' Human Development Index, and fourth in the Economist Intelligence Unit's quality of life index. It ranked 23rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.
The industrial sector, dominated by steel until the 1960s, has since diversified to include chemicals, rubber, and other products. During recent decades, growth in the financial sector has more than compensated for the decline in steel production. Services, especially banking and finance, account for the majority of the economic output. Luxembourg is the world's second-largest investment fund centre (after the United States), the most important private banking centre in the eurozone and Europe's leading centre for reinsurance companies. Moreover, Luxembourg's government has aimed to attract Internet startups, with Skype and Amazon being two of the many Internet companies that have shifted their regional headquarters to Luxembourg. Other high-tech companies have established themselves in Luxembourg, including 3d scanner developer/manufacturer Artec 3D.
Agriculture employed about 2.1% of Luxembourg's active population in 2010, when there were 2,200 agricultural holdings with an average area per holding of 60 hectares.
Luxembourg has especially close trade and financial ties to Belgium and the Netherlands (see Benelux), and as a member of the EU it enjoys the advantages of the open European market.
With $171 billion in May 2015, the country ranked 11th in the world in holdings of U.S. Treasury securities. However, securities owned by non-Luxembourg residents, but held in custodial accounts in Luxembourg, are included in this figure.
As of 2019, Luxembourg's public debt totalled $15,687,000,000, or $25,554 per capita. The debt to GDP was 22.10%.
The Luxembourg labour market represents 445,000 jobs occupied by 120,000 Luxembourgers, 120,000 foreign residents and 205,000 cross-border commuters. The latter pay their taxes in Luxembourg, but their education is partially financed by their country of residence. Luxembourg's government has never shared its tax revenues with the local authorities on the French border. This system is seen by some as one of the keys to Luxembourg's economic growth, but at the expense of the border countries.

Luxembourg as a tax haven
In April 2009, concern about Luxembourg's banking secrecy laws, as well as its reputation as a tax haven, led to its being added to a "grey list" of nations with questionable banking arrangements by the G20. In response, the country soon adopted OECD standards on exchange of information and was subsequently added into the category of "jurisdictions that have substantially implemented the internationally agreed tax standard". In March 2010, the Sunday Telegraph reported that most of Kim Jong Il's $4 billion in secret accounts was in Luxembourg banks. Amazon.co.uk also benefits from Luxembourg tax loopholes by channelling substantial UK revenues, as reported by The Guardian in April 2012. Luxembourg ranked third on the Tax Justice Network's 2011 Financial Secrecy Index of the world's major tax havens, scoring only slightly behind the Cayman Islands. In 2013, Luxembourg was ranked the second safest tax haven in the world, behind Switzerland.
In early November 2014, just days after becoming head of the European Commission, Luxembourg's former Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker was hit by media disclosures—derived from a document leak known as LuxLeaks—that Luxembourg had turned into a major European centre of corporate tax avoidance under his premiership.

Transport
Luxembourg has road, rail and air transport facilities and services. The road network has been significantly modernized in recent years with 165 km (103 mi) of motorways connecting the capital to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station and a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport was opened in 2008. Luxembourg City reintroduced trams in December 2017 and there are plans to open light-rail lines to connect Luxembourg City with Esch-sur-Alzette by 2030.
There are 681 cars per 1000 persons in Luxembourg—higher than in most other states, though surpassed by the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Iceland, and other small states like the Principality of Monaco, San Marino, Liechtenstein, the British overseas territory of Gibraltar, and Brunei.
On 29 February 2020, Luxembourg became the first country to introduce no-charge public transportation, which is almost completely funded by public taxation. Ridership of buses, trains and trams has grown consistently since, though operating costs had nearly doubled by 2025.

Communications
The telecommunications industry in Luxembourg is liberalized and the electronic communications networks are significantly developed. Competition between the different operators is guaranteed by the legislative framework Paquet Telecom of the Government of 2011 which transposes the European Telecom Directives into Luxembourgish law. This encourages the investment in networks and services. The regulator ILR – Institut Luxembourgeois de Régulation ensures the compliance to these legal rules.
Luxembourg has modern and widely deployed optical fibre and cable networks throughout the country. In 2010, the Luxembourg Government launched its National strategy for very high-speed networks with the aim to become a global leader in terms of very high-speed broadband by achieving full 1 Gbit/s coverage of the country by 2020. In 2011, Luxembourg had an NGA coverage of 75%. In April 2013, Luxembourg featured the sixth highest download speed worldwide and the second highest in Europe: 32,46 Mbit/s. The country's location in Central Europe, stable economy and low taxes favour the telecommunication industry.
It ranks second in the world in the development of the Information and Communication Technologies in the ITU ICT Development Index and 8th in the Global Broadband Quality Study 2009 by the University of Oxford and the University of Oviedo.

Luxembourg is connected to all major European Internet Exchanges (AMS-IX Amsterdam, DE-CIX Frankfurt, LINX London), datacentres and POPs through redundant optical networks. In addition, the country is connected to the virtual meetme room services (vmmr) of the international data hub operator Ancotel. This enables Luxembourg to interconnect with all major telecommunication operators and data carriers worldwide. The interconnection points are in Frankfurt, London, New York and Hong Kong. Luxembourg has established itself as one of the leading financial technology (FinTech) hubs in Europe, with the Luxembourg government supporting initiatives like the Luxembourg House of Financial Technology.
Some 20 data centres are operating in Luxembourg. Six data centres are Tier IV Design certified: three of ebrc, two of LuxConnect and one of European Data Hub. In a survey on nine international data centres carried out in December 2012 and January 2013 and measuring availability (up-time) and performance (delay by which the data from the requested website was received), the top three positions were held by Luxembourg data centres.

Energy
Luxembourg has a high demand for transportation fuels and fossil fuels. Despite that, Luxembourg's climate law sets a goal that by 2030 it would have reduced emission down to 55%, as well as getting 49% of all cars to be electric by 2030. Luxembourg has adopted some measures to reach that goal, including a carbon tax that encourage renewable generations. Several groups also support energy efficiency.

Demographics
Largest towns
Ethnicity
The people of Luxembourg are called Luxembourgers. The immigrant population increased in the 20th century due to the arrival of immigrants from Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, and Portugal; the last comprised the largest group. In 2013 about 88,000 Luxembourg inhabitants possessed Portuguese nationality. In 2025, there were 681,973 permanent residents, 47% of which were of foreign nationals; the largest foreign national groups were the Portuguese, comprising 13.2% of the total population, followed by the French (7.2%), Italians (3.7%), Belgians (2.7%) and Germans (1.8%). Another 7.2% were of another EU nationality, 3.5% were non-EU European, and 7.2% were from outside Europe.
Since the beginning of the Yugoslav wars, Luxembourg has seen many immigrants from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia. Annually, over 10,000 new immigrants arrive in Luxembourg, mostly from the EU states, as well as Eastern Europe. In 2000 there were 162,000 immigrants in Luxembourg, accounting for 37% of the total population. There were an estimated 5,000 illegal immigrants in Luxembourg in 1999.

Language
Luxembourg does not have any "official" languages per se. As determined by the 1984 Language Regimen Act (French: Loi sur le régime des langues), Luxembourgish is the sole national language of the Luxembourgish people. It is considered the mother tongue or "language of the heart" for Luxembourgers and the language they generally use to speak or write to each other. Luxembourgish as well as the dialects in adjacent Germany belong to the Moselle Franconian subgroup of the main West Central German dialect group, which are largely mutually intelligible across the border, but Luxembourgish also has more than 5,000 words of French origin. Knowledge of Luxembourgish is a criterion for naturalization.
In addition to Luxembourgish, French and German are used in administrative and judicial matters, making all three administrative languages of Luxembourg. Per article 4 of the law promulgated in 1984, if a citizen asks a question in Luxembourgish, German or French, the administration must reply, as far as possible, in the language in which the question was asked.

Luxembourg is largely multilingual. According to 2021 census data, 48.9% of citizens claimed Luxembourgish as their main language, 15.4% Portuguese, 14.9% French, 3.6% English, 3.6% Italian, 2.9% German and 10.8% different languages (the most spoken ones being Spanish, Arabic, Dutch, Russian, Polish and Romanian). 

Though not the most common mother tongue in Luxembourg, French is the most widely-known language in the country: in 2018, 98% of citizens were able to speak it. The vast majority of Luxembourg residents are able to speak it as a second or third language. As of 2018, much of the population was able to speak multiple other languages: 80% of citizens reported being able to hold a conversation in English, 78% in German and 77% in Luxembourgish, claiming these languages as their respective second, third or fourth language.
Each of the three official languages is used as a primary language in certain spheres of everyday life, without being exclusive. Luxembourgish is the language that Luxembourgers generally use to speak and write to each other, and there has been a recent increase in the production of novels and movies in the language. At the same time, the numerous expatriate workers (approximately 44% of the population) generally do not use it to speak to each other.
Most official business and written communication is carried out in French, which is also the language mostly used for public communication, with written official statements, advertising displays and road signs generally in French. Due to the historical influence of the Napoleonic Code on the legal system of the Grand Duchy, French is also the sole language of the legislation and generally the preferred language of the government, administration and justice. Parliamentary debates are mostly conducted in Luxembourgish, whereas written government communications and official documents (e.g. administrative or judicial decisions, passports, etc.) are drafted mostly in French and sometimes additionally in German.
Although professional life is largely multilingual, French is described by private sector business leaders as the main working language of their companies (56%), followed by Luxembourgish (20%), English (18%), and German (6%).
German is very often used in much of the media along with French and is considered by most Luxembourgers their second language. This is mostly due to the high similarity of German to Luxembourgish but also because it is the first language taught to children in primary school (language of literacy acquisition).
Due to the large community of Portuguese origin, the Portuguese language is fairly prevalent in Luxembourg, though it remains limited to the relationships inside this community. Portuguese has no official status, but the administration sometimes makes certain informative documents available in Portuguese.
Even though Luxembourg is largely multilingual today, some people claim that Luxembourg is subject of intense francization and that Luxembourgish and German are in danger of disappearing in the country. This would make Luxembourg either a unilingual Francophone country, or at best a bilingual French- and English-speaking country sometime in the far future.

Religion
Luxembourg is a secular state, but the state recognizes certain religions as officially mandated religions. This gives the state a hand in religious administration and appointment of clergy, in exchange for which the state pays certain running costs and wages. Religions covered by such arrangements are Catholicism, Judaism, Greek Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, Russian Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Calvinism, Mennonitism, and Islam.
Since 1980, it has been illegal for the government to collect statistics on religious beliefs or practices. According to a 2021 Eurobarometer survey, 53% are Christian (46% Catholic, 2% protestant, 2% Orthodox, 3% other christians), 1% Muslim, 38% unaffiliated (25% not religious or agnostic and 13% atheist) and 7% follow other religions.
According to a 2005 Eurobarometer poll, 44% of Luxembourg citizens responded that "they believe there is a God", whereas 28% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force", and 22% that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force".

Education
Luxembourg's education system is trilingual: the first years of primary school are in Luxembourgish, before changing to German; while in secondary school, the language of instruction changes to French. Proficiency in all three languages is required for graduation from secondary school. In addition to the three national languages, English is taught in compulsory schooling and much of the population of Luxembourg can speak English. The past two decades have highlighted the growing importance of English in several sectors, in particular the financial sector. Portuguese, the language of the largest immigrant community, is also spoken by large segments of the population, but by relatively few from outside the Portuguese-speaking community.
The University of Luxembourg is the only university based in Luxembourg. In 2014, Luxembourg School of Business, a graduate business school, was created through private initiative and received the accreditation from the Ministry of Higher Education and Research of Luxembourg in 2017. Miami University, an American university, maintains the Dolibois European Center satellite campus in Differdange.

Health
According to data from the World Health Organization, healthcare spending on behalf of the government of Luxembourg topped $4.1 Billion, amounting to about $8,182 for each citizen in the nation. Luxembourg allows residents to choose their own doctor while also having public healthcare cover 80% to 90% of all healthcare costs. The nation of Luxembourg collectively spent nearly 7% of its gross domestic product on health, placing it among the highest spending countries on health services and related programmes in 2010, and 6th place in highest health index of countries in Europe in 2023.

Culture
Luxembourg has been heavily influenced by the culture of its neighbours. It retains a number of folk traditions, having been for much of its history a profoundly rural country. There are several notable museums, located mostly in the capital. These include the National Museum of History and Art (NMHA), the Luxembourg City History Museum, and the new Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art (Mudam). The National Museum of Military History (MNHM) in Diekirch is especially known for its representations of the Battle of the Bulge. The Old City of Luxembourg is part of the UNESCO World Heritage List, on account of the historical importance of its fortifications.
The country has produced some internationally known artists, including the painters Théo Kerg, Joseph Kutter and Michel Majerus, and photographer Edward Steichen, whose The Family of Man exhibition has been placed on UNESCO's Memory of the World register, and is now permanently housed in Clervaux. Editor and author Hugo Gernsback, whose publications crystallized the concept of science fiction, was born in Luxembourg City. Movie star Loretta Young was of Luxembourgish descent.
Luxembourg was a founding participant of the Eurovision Song Contest, and participated every year between 1956 and before it was relegated after the 1993 competition, except for the 1959 contest. Although Luxembourg was free to participate again in 1995, it chose not to return to the competition before 2024. It has won the competition a total of five times, in 1961, 1965, 1972, 1973 and 1983 and hosted the contest in 1962, 1966, 1973, and 1984. Only nine of its 38 entries before 2024, and none of its five winning entries, were performed by Luxembourgish artists. Its 2024 return had a particular emphasis on promoting music and artists from Luxembourg.
Luxembourg was the first city to be named European Capital of Culture twice. The first time was in 1995. In 2007, the European Capital of Culture was to be a cross-border area consisting of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Rheinland-Pfalz and Saarland in Germany, the Walloon Region and the German-speaking part of Belgium, and the Lorraine area in France. The event was an attempt to promote mobility and the exchange of ideas, crossing borders physically, psychologically, artistically and emotionally.
Luxembourg was represented at the World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, China, from 1 May to 31 October 2010 with its own pavilion. The pavilion, designed as a forest and fortress, was based on the transliteration of the word Luxembourg into Chinese, "Lúsēnbǎo", which when directly translated, means "forest and fortress". It represented Luxembourg as the "Green Heart in Europe".

Media
The main languages of media in Luxembourg are French and German. The newspaper with the largest circulation is the German-language daily Luxemburger Wort. Because of the strong multilingualism in Luxembourg, newspapers often alternate articles in French and articles in German, without translation. In addition, there are both English and Portuguese radio and national print publications, but accurate audience figures are difficult to gauge since the national media survey by ILRES is conducted in French.
Luxembourg is known in Europe for its radio and television stations (Radio Luxembourg and RTL Group). It is also the uplink home of SES, carrier of major European satellite services for Germany and Britain.
Due to a 1988 law that established a special tax scheme for audiovisual investment, the film and co-production in Luxembourg has grown steadily. There are some 30 registered production companies in Luxembourg.
Luxembourg won an Oscar in 2014 in the Animated Short Films category with Mr Hublot.

Cuisine
Luxembourg cuisine reflects its position on the border between the Latin and Germanic worlds, being heavily influenced by the cuisines of neighbouring France and Germany. More recently, it has been enriched by its many Italian and Portuguese immigrants.
Most native Luxembourg dishes, consumed as the traditional daily fare, share roots in the country's folk dishes, the same as in neighbouring Germany.
Luxembourg sells the most alcohol in Europe per capita. However, the large proportion of alcohol purchased by customers from neighbouring countries contributes to the statistically high level of alcohol sales per capita; this level of alcohol sales is thus not representative of the actual alcohol consumption of the Luxembourg population.
Luxembourg has the second highest number of Michelin-starred restaurants per capita with Japan ranked at number one and Switzerland following Luxembourg at number three.

Sports
Unlike most countries in Europe, sports in Luxembourg are not concentrated upon a particular national sport, but instead encompass a number of sports, both team and individual. Despite the lack of a central sporting focus, over 100,000 people in Luxembourg, out of a total population of 660,000, are licensed members of one sports federation or another. The Stade de Luxembourg, situated in Gasperich, southern Luxembourg City, is the country's national stadium and largest sports venue in the country with a capacity of 9,386 for sporting events, including football and rugby union, and 15,000 for concerts. The largest indoor venue in the country is d'Coque, Kirchberg, north-eastern Luxembourg City, which has a capacity of 8,300. The arena is used for basketball, handball, gymnastics, and volleyball, including the final of the 2007 Women's European Volleyball Championship. Hess Cycling Team is a Luxembourgish women's road cycling team.

See also
Outline of Luxembourg
Disability in Luxembourg

References
Notes
Citations
Works cited
Further reading
External links

The Official Portal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
The Luxembourg Government. "Information and Press Service". sip.gouvernement.lu. Retrieved 29 May 2026.
"Luxembourg". UCB Libraries GovPubs. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2026.
"Luxembourg". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 17 September 2025. Archived from the original on 28 January 2026.
"Luxembourg profile". BBC News. 20 November 2023. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2026.
"Luxembourg's Constitution of 1868 with Amendments through 2009, English Translation 2012" (PDF). Constitute Project. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2026.
 Wikimedia Atlas of Luxembourg

## Tourism in Luxembourg
Tourism is an important component of the national economy of Luxembourg, representing about 8.3% of GDP in 2009 and employing some 25,000 people or 11.7% of the working population. In 2010, despite the Great Recession, the Grand Duchy still welcomed over 900,000 visitors a year who spend an average of 2.5 nights in hotels, hostels or on camping sites. Business travel is flourishing representing 44% of overnight stays in the country and 60% in the capital, up 11% and 25% between 2009 and 2010. Published by the World Economic Forum in March 2011, the Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report puts Luxembourg in 15th place worldwide, up from 23rd place in 2009.
Major destinations are historic Luxembourg City, the medieval castle of Vianden, Echternach with its abbey and the wine districts of the Moselle valley. The Mullerthal with its rocky cliffs in the east and the mountainous Éislek region in the Ardennes to the north are also favourites for outdoor enthusiasts.
Luxembourg has good road, rail and air connections with the rest of Europe, making it an increasingly popular destination for international meetings as well as for extended weekend stays. Over half the visitors to Luxembourg come from the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany with substantial numbers from France, the United Kingdom and the United States. Camping is popular in Luxembourg, particularly with the Dutch, who camp for much longer than other nationalities, especially in the Ardennes and the Mullerthal.

The Grand Duchy
Bordered by Belgium, France, and Germany, Luxembourg has a population of over half a million people in an area of 2,586 square kilometres (998 sq mi).
A representative democracy and constitutional monarchy ruled by a Grand Duke, it is the world's only remaining Grand Duchy. The country has a highly developed economy, with the world's highest GDP per capita. Its strategic importance dates back to a Roman era fortress and Frankish count's castle site in the Early Middle Ages. The  City of Luxembourg, the capital and largest city, is the seat of several institutions and agencies of the European Union and an important financial centre.
Luxembourg culture is a mix of Romance Europe and Germanic Europe, borrowing customs from each of the distinct traditions. While Luxembourgers are fluent in all three of their official languages, German, French and Luxembourgish, most also have a good working knowledge of English.

Travel
Luxembourg's road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with motorways to Belgium, France and Germany. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station while the new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport handled over 1.6 million passengers in 2010, an increase of 5.1%.
There are frequent air connections with many European cities including Amsterdam, Berlin,  Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Geneva, London, Madrid, Paris and Rome. Paris can also be reached in just over two hours by rail and in about three and a half hours by road. Brussels is some two hours away by road, a little longer by rail.

Accommodation
In 2009, Luxembourg had 261 hotels, inns and hostels able to accommodate 14,709 guests. The central area including the City of Luxembourg had a capacity of 8,057 guests (55%) followed by the Ardennes region with a capacity of 2,757 (18%). The total number of nights spent in hotels, inns and hostels was 1,264,448, down 8% on 2007. The number of nights spent camping was 739,208, down 8.4%.

National celebrations
Luxembourg has a number of celebrations of its own, some of which date back centuries. Among the most popular are:

Buergbrennen: held on the Sunday after Shrove Tuesday, huge bonfires blaze throughout the country celebrating the end of winter.
Emaischen: held every Easter Monday in the village of Nospelt and in Luxembourg's Fish Market, the centrepiece of the pottery fair is the Péckvillchen, a bird-shaped earthenware whistle.
Octave: the main religious festival of the year, the octave is held in the second half of April for a period of two weeks when pilgrims come to the cathedral; a market on the Place Guillaume offers food, drink and religious artifacts.
Dancing procession of Echternach: held on Whit Tuesday in memory of St Willibrord, hundreds of people "spring" from left to right as they dance through the town, linked by white handkerchiefs.
National holiday: celebrated throughout the country on 23 June in honour of the grand duke, the festivities begin on the evening of the 22nd with a firework display in the centre of Luxembourg City.
Schueberfouer: the extensive fun fair with all the traditional rides goes up in Limpertsberg on the Glacis around 23 August and remains for about three weeks.
Wine festivals: usually held in October in the wine villages along the Moselle as a thanksgiving celebration for the grape harvest.
St Nicolas: Kleeschen, the patron saint of children, with his servant in black, arrives in every village accompanied by a brass band ready, in agreement with their parents, to distribute presents to the children.

Food and drink
Luxembourg cuisine combines the quality of French dishes with the quantity of German and Belgian servings. But there are also some national favourites such as Bouneschlupp, a soup with French beans, Judd mat Gaardebounen, neck of pork with broad beans, and Fritür, small fried fish from the Moselle. Dry white wines from the Moselle valley include Riesling, Pinot gris, Pinot blanc and Auxerrois and the less sophisticated Rivaner and Elbling. Also popular is Luxembourg's Crémant, a sparkling wine produced in accordance with the traditional method for French champagne.

Statistics
Arrivals by country
Total number of foreign tourists in Luxembourg in 2016 was 1,053,653. Most visitors arriving to Luxembourg and staying in accommodation in 2016 were from the following countries:

Regions
Luxembourg City
The City of Luxembourg is not only a historic UNESCO site with its fortifications lining the steep valley but also an important European and financial centre with imposing modern buildings.
In September 2011, the Luxembourg City Tourist Office reported that after several years of decline, the city welcomed 403,085 tourists between January and August 2011, a 6.38 increase over 2010. The casemates were the most popular attraction with a total of 87,083 visitors, most of whom visited the Bock Casemates.

The old town
Within walking distance of each other, places of interest in the old town include the fortifications and the underground defences known as the casemates, the Grand Ducal Palace, the neogothic Cathedral of Notre Dame, Place Guillaume II with the City Hall, the Place d'Armes with its pavement restaurants and cafés, the Gëlle Fra or Golden Lady crowning the obelisk in memory of those who died for their country during the First World War and the nearby Adolphe Bridge towering over the valley.
There are also two particularly interesting museums in the old town. The Luxembourg City History Museum traces the history of the city from its foundations (in the lower floors) to the present (at the top) while the National Museum of History and Art showcases Celtic and Roman findings including the well-preserved Vichten Mosaic depicting the Roman muses.

The Grund
The valley itself, known as the Grund, also has points of interest such as the Neimënster Abbey and the Natural History Museum. Once a poor quarter of the city, it has become increasingly popular for its night life in the narrow medieval streets and for its gastronomic restaurants.

Kirchberg
The Kirchberg Plateau which covers the area between the city and the airport began to develop in the 1970s with office buildings for the European Institutions. Over the years, it has become the focus of Luxembourg's financial interests with an impressive array of banks and business centres. There have also been cultural developments such as the impressive Museum of Modern Art and the Philharmonie concert hall as well as sports and entertainment facilities.

Vianden
Located close to the German border in northeastern Luxembourg, Vianden is a small hilly town in a picturesque setting on the River Our. Visitors are attracted above all by the carefully restored medieval castle standing high above the river but also by the old-world atmosphere which pervades the town. 
Vianden Castle was built between the 11th and 14th centuries and became the seat of the counts of Vianden. It was further developed until the 18th century but with the departure of the Counts of Luxembourg to the Netherlands combined with the effects of fire and an earthquake, it slowly deteriorated. The final blow came in 1820 when William I of the Netherlands sold it to a local merchant who in turn sold off its contents and masonry piecemeal, reducing it to a ruin. Not until 1977, when Grand Duke Jean ceded the castle to the State, was it possible to undertake large-scale restoration work.
Vianden also has a chair lift up to a restaurant high above the castle, offering extensive views of the town and its mountainous surroundings. The Victor Hugo museum near the bridge over the River Our presents a number of the author's original letters and drawings in the house where he used to stay.

Echternach
With a population of some 4,000, Echternach near the German border is the oldest town in Luxembourg. It was founded in 698 by St. Willibrord, an English monk who was the abbot of the monastery until his death in 739. In his honour, for the past 500 years the dancing procession has taken place every Whit Tuesday, attracting pilgrims from near and far. The Romanesque basilica with symmetrical towers still houses his tomb in its crypt. The town of Echternach grew up around the abbey walls and was granted a city charter in 1236. The abbey was rebuilt in a handsome Baroque range in 1737. Echternach is also the site of a large Roman villa which was discovered in 1975 and is open to visitors.
The town, still surrounded by its medieval walls, hosts the International Music Festival in May and June each year. It is an ideal starting point for walks into the Mullertal or for cycle trips along the River Sure. Echternach also has an interesting Prehistory Museum.

The Moselle valley
Stretching 42 km (26 mi) from Schengen in the south to Wasserbillig in the north, the rounded hills of the Moselle valley are lined by vineyards. The river passes a number of quaint little riverside towns and villages with narrow streets, wine cooperatives and annual wine festivals. From south to north, the river flows past Schengen, famous for the EU agreement facilitating cross-border travel, Remerschen, Schwebsange, Bech-Kleinmacher, Wellenstein and Remich which has been attracting wine-enthusiasts since Roman times and is still a busy venue for tourists with promenades, gardens, river excursions and wine cellars. After Stadtbredimus on the river front and Greiveldange up in the hills, the Moselle then passes the charming villages of Ehnen with its Wine Museum, Wormeldange, Ahn and Machtum where some of Luxembourg's finest restaurants are to be found. Then comes the small town of Grevenmacher before the Moselle meets the Sauer at the busy border town of Wasserbillig.

Esch-Belval
Belval is a district of Esch-sur-Alzette in the south of Luxembourg. It is located in the Minett region, also known as the “Land of the Red Earth,” directly on the border with France and Belgium. In the past, Belval was an important industrial site. Starting in 1911, the Luxembourg steel company ARBED produced steel here, shaping Luxembourg’s economic upswing. For almost 100 years, blast furnaces and factory halls defined the character of this area.
With the 2000s came a profound transformation. The industrial facilities were shut down, and Belval developed into a modern urban district for work, study, and leisure. Today, history and future are impressively intertwined here. The two remaining blast furnaces (the last ones in Luxembourg) were preserved as industrial monuments and have been protected since July 18, 2000. Tourists can visit one of the blast furnaces and experience the impressive industrial architecture up close. Guided tours vividly explain the history of steel production, while the second blast furnace is now used for modern facilities. They serve as reminders of the significant role the steel industry played for Luxembourg and shape the historical heritage of the district.
On the site, the “Cité des Sciences” emerged, a modern campus of the University of Luxembourg. At its center stands the “Maison du Savoir”, a striking 85-meter-high tower that echoes the proportions of the old blast furnaces. A central part of the campus is the university library, the Luxembourg Learning Center (LLC). It is located in the former Möllerei, the ore-sorting building between the two remaining blast furnaces and combines history and the present. The steel architecture was preserved and complemented with modern elements. The LLC is accessible not only to students but also to the public. Visitors can freely enter the library, explore spaces of knowledge, and experience the unique combination of industrial history and contemporary architecture. Anyone interested in science, research, or architecture will find inspiring insights here.
Yet Belval offers much more than education and research. After discovering the academic side of the district, visitors can explore its lively urban environment. Belval Plaza is the vibrant heart of the area, where people meet to shop and eat. Cafés, restaurants, and international cuisines offer culinary variety. Visitors can try local and international specialties or, during a stroll, discover modern architecture and street art. Fashion, leisure activities, and the Kinepolis cinema provide entertainment in an urban atmosphere. 
Another important place in Belval is the Rockhal, a modern concert hall that opened in 2005. International and local artists perform here, making the Rockhal a cultural meeting point for music lovers from Luxembourg and around the world. It is located in the immediate vicinity of the old blast furnaces, thus connecting industrial history with modern culture.
Belval impressively demonstrates how a former industrial site can be transformed into a modern, diverse urban district offering education, culture, and leisure. Historical blast furnaces, the university, Belval Plaza, and the Rockhal make it a destination that unites history, present, and future.

Other areas of interest
The Ardennes in the north of the country present excellent opportunities for ramblers and mountain bikers in an area of forested hills, rocky crags and green valleys. Additional attractions are the castles of Bourscheid, Brandenbourg, Clervaux, Esch-sur-Sûre, Vianden and Wiltz as well as the Lac de la Haute-Sûre which provides opportunities for swimming and water sports.
The Mullerthal, just north of Echternach, also offers interesting walking and cycling circuits through curious rock formations, often complete with caves. The motorist too can experience a surprising variety of countryside driving through the river valleys and up to the surprisingly flat plains above. Berdorf and Beaufort are popular tourist centres.
Mondorf-les-Bains in the south of the country not only has a range of modern spa and fitness facilities but is home to Luxembourg's only gambling facility, Casino 2000. Not far from Mondorf is one of the Luxembourg's most interesting Roman sites, Dalheim Ricciacum, with its old Roman theatre.

Attractions
The Bock casemates in Luxembourg City are open daily from 10 am to 5 pm from March to October. Now a UNESCO heritage site, these underground passages were part of Luxembourg's former defences.
The National Museum of Military History at Diekirch in the central part of Luxembourg provides insights into the Battle of the Bulge and related episodes of World War II. The museum is open every day from 10 am to 6 pm.
Les Thermes, an indoor/outdoor water park in Strassen just west of Luxembourg City, offers an olympic swimming pool, two pools for children, wave baths, slides and sauna.
From April to early October, the Parc Merveilleux near Bettembourg has a range of attractions for children including rides, mini zoo, and fairy tale presentations.

The historic steam Train 1900 operates between Petange and Fond-de-Gras in the south-east of Luxembourg on Sunday afternoons between May and September. From Fond-de-Gras, trips on the Minièresbunn narrow gauge railway are also possible.
The National Mining Museum in Rumelange, south-east Luxembourg, is open April to September from Thursday to Sunday, 2 pm to 6 pm. Lasting about an hour and a half, the visit includes a 20-minute trip on the old railway deep into the mine.
The Butterfly Garden in Grevenmacher is open every day from April to mid-October.
The Lankelz Railway in Esch-sur-Alzette, south-eastern Luxembourg, is a miniature railway on a scale of one third normal size. The railway operates on Sunday afternoons and public holidays from May to mid-October.
The Aquarium is located in Wasserbillig, a small town in the south west of Luxembourg. Open every day from Easter to the end of September, it is otherwise open every Friday, Saturday and Sunday. There are 15 tanks from 300 to 40,000 litres with fish from all five continents in their natural surroundings.

See also
List of castles in Luxembourg
List of museums in Luxembourg

External links

Luxembourg Tourist Office, London
Visit Luxembourg


== References ==

## Culture of Luxembourg
The culture of Luxembourg refers to the cultural life and traditions of Luxembourg. Most citizens are trilingual, speaking French and German in addition to the Germanic national language of Luxembourgish. Although its contributions to the arts are not largely known outside its borders, Luxembourg has a rich cultural history, especially in music, painting and photography. Its evolving museums, concert halls, theatres and galleries testify to its citizens' growing appreciation of culture.

Arts
Painting
Jean-Baptiste Fresez and Nicolas Liez who both painted the City of Luxembourg and its surroundings were the country's most important 19th-century artists. Jean Jacoby, who was awarded two Olympic Gold medals for his artwork and, above all, Joseph Kutter with his Expressionist landscapes and portraits, were notable during the first half of the 20th century. Kutter's brightly coloured painting of "Luxembourg", commissioned for the 1937 World Exposition in Paris reveals his mature Expressionist style, of which there is more than natural emphasis on how the houses appear to be stacked up one behind the other, how the buildings take on almost cubic contours and how the fortifications tower powerfully above the valley.
Other celebrated painters of the periods were the Impressionist Dominique Lang; Nico Klopp, who painted striking post-impressionist landscapes of the Moselle; and Sosthène Weis, whose innumerable watercolours of Luxembourg City and its surroundings are reminiscent of the style of J. M. W. Turner.
Major contributors to the art scene after World War II were Emile Kirscht, Michel Stoffel, Foni Tissen, and Gust Graas. Closely associated with the post-war artists was the sculptor Lucien Wercollier whose impressive abstract works in bronze and marble can be found not just in public places in Luxembourg but in the surrounding countries too.
The sculptor Claus Cito (1882–1965) is remembered above all for the Gëlle Fra (Golden Woman) sculpture crowning the Monument of Remembrance obelisk (1923), raised in memory of the Luxembourg soldiers who died for their country in the First World War.
One of the country's most successful contemporary artists is Su-Mei Tse who, in 2003, won the Golden Lion, a prize awarded to the best national participant at the Venice International Exhibition of Contemporary Art.

Photography
Considering the country's small size, the photography in Luxembourg has made an important contribution to local culture. Although he grew up and worked all his life in the United States, the influential photographer and painter Edward Steichen was of Luxembourg descent, and after the Second World War as manager of the photography department at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, he arranged two important donations for Luxembourg. First in 1964, he provided a permanent home in Clervaux, Luxembourg for his famous exhibition "The Family of Man"; and then in 1967, the USA sent another treasure to Luxembourg, the exhibition "The Bitter Years". Similarly, Gabriel Lippmann who was also born in Luxembourg but moved to France when only three, was awarded the Nobel Prize for his pioneering work in colour photography. Charles Bernhoeft (1859-1933) was a successful portrait and landscape photographer, publishing a number of luxurious albums, illustrated maps and several series of postcards.
Contemporary photographers include the photojournalists Patrick Galbats, Yvon Lambert and Thierry Frisch.

Literature and poetry
Little is known of Luxembourg literature beyond the country's borders, partly because three languages are used, partly because many works assume a local readership. Furthermore, it was not until the 19th century that the literature of Luxembourg began to develop.
In 1829, Antoine Meyer published the very first book in Lëtzebuerger Däitsch, the local Germanic dialect later called Luxembourgish, a collection of poems titled "E' Schrek op de' Lezeburger Parnassus" (A Step up Luxembourg's Parnassus).
Edmond de la Fontaine (1823–1891), better known by his pen-name Dicks, is considered the national poet of Luxembourg. Along with Michel Lentz and Michel Rodange, he is an outstanding figure in the history of Luxembourg literature, writing poetry in Luxembourgish. Another influential writer was Batty Weber (1860–1940) who worked both as a journalist and as an author of short stories, novels, plays and poems, contributing much to the development of Luxembourg culture. Anise Koltz (born in 1928), first writing mainly in German and Luxembourgish but later in French, is the country's most important contemporary author. Another successful contemporary novelist and poet is Jean Portante (born in 1950).
Luxembourgish literature was long confined to poetry and the theatre, but in the 1980s, as a result of the movement to make Luxembourgish an official language, Guy Rewenig (born in 1947) and Roger Manderscheid (1933–2010) both wrote novels in Luxembourgish. Rewenig's Hannert dem Atlantik appeared in 1985 and Manderscheid's childhood trilogy Schacko klak, De papagei um kâschtebam and Feier a flam in 1988.

Architecture
The city of Luxembourg is on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
The architecture of Luxembourg extends back to the Treveri, a Celtic tribe that prospered in the 1st century BC. A few ruins remain from the Roman occupation but the most significant contributions over the centuries have been the country's castles and churches. Notable examples are the Vianden Castle and the Echternach Basilica. Today there is a veritable architectural boom as Luxembourg's economic prosperity provides a basis for developments in the financial, EU and cultural sectors with a number of world-class buildings. These include the Philharmonie Concert Hall, the Museum of Modern Art and the new European Investment Bank building.

Music
The wide general interest in music and musical activities in Luxembourg can be seen from the membership of the Union Grand-Duc Adolphe, the national music federation for choral societies, brass bands, music schools, theatrical societies, folklore associations and instrumental groups. Some 340 societies with over 17,000 individual members are currently represented by the organization.
The two main venues for classical music in Luxembourg are the Philharmonie concert hall, home to the Philharmonie de Luxembourg orchestra, and the Grand Théâtre de Luxembourg with frequent performances of opera and ballet. Luxembourg's internationally recognized soloists include violinist Sandrine Cantoreggi, cellist Françoise Groben, pianists Francesco Tristano Schlimé and Jean Muller, and singer Mariette Kemmer. Among its contemporary composers are Camille Kerger, Claude Lenners, Georges Lentz (although he lives mainly in Australia), Alexander Mullenbach and Marcel Wengler.
Composers such as Alexander Mullenbach provide key insights into the uniqueness of the cultural perspective of Luxembourgers: "One of the most important qualities of being a Luxembourger abroad is the fact that we have an affinity, linguistically and culturally, with both the German and French (and also Anglo-Saxon) culture. This allows us as Luxembourgers to have a different approach and access to these cultures, especially when working in the arts or cultural scene."
Opera is frequently performed in Luxembourg City at the Grand Théâtre and in Esch-sur-Alzette at the Théâtre d'Esch as well as at the annual Wiltz festival.
Brian Molko, singer/guitarist of rock band Placebo lived in Luxembourg for most of his life, where he learned to play various instruments such as guitar, piano and saxophone. Bassist Stefan Olsdal also lived there, the two of them met at school in Luxembourg but lost touch until they met again years later in London.  One of the most influential Luxembourg bands of the last decades is Cool Feet, which performs old Luxembourgish songs.
Luxembourg was a founding participant of the Eurovision Song Contest, and participated every year between 1956 and before it was relegated after the 1993, with the exception of 1959. Although Luxembourg was free to participate again in 1995, it chose not to return to the competition before 2024. It has won the competition a total of five times, 1961, 1965, 1972, 1973 and 1983 and hosted the contest in 1962, 1966, 1973, and 1984. Only nine of its 38 entries before 2024, and none of its five winning entries, were performed by Luxembourgish artists. On its 2024 return, this was, however, with a particular emphasis on promoting music and artists from Luxembourg.
For modern popular music concerts, the neighborhood of Belval in Esch-Sur-Alzette hosts the venue of Rockhal, one of the largest venues for international Pop/Rock acts. For outdoor festivals, the city of Echternach has hosted the e-Lake Music Festival of electronic music the second week of every August since 1997.

Cinema
Cultural institutions
Museums
The major museums are:

National Museum of History and Art (MNHA)
National Museum of Natural History (NMHN)
Luxembourg City History Museum
Museum of Modern Art Grand-Duc Jean (MUDAM)
National Museum of Resistance and Human Rights, Esch-sur-Alzette
National Mining Museum, Luxembourg
National Museum of Military History, Diekirch

Galleries
Casino Luxembourg, forum for contemporary art in Luxembourg City
Villa Vauban, art museum

Exhibitions
The Family of Man exhibit at Clervaux Castle

Cuisine
Food
Luxembourg's cuisine has been influenced over the years by neighboring France, Germany, and Belgium. More recently, it has had influence from its many Italian and Portuguese immigrants.
Luxembourg has many delicacies including its pastries, cheese, and fresh fish (brown trout, pike, and crayfish). Other delicacies include the Ardennes ham smoked in saltpeter, game during hunting season (such as hare and wild boar), small plum tarts in September (Quetsch), smoked neck of pork with broad beans (Judd mat Gaardebounen), fried small river fish (such as bream, chub, gudgeon, roach, and rudd), liver dumplings (Quenelle) with sauerkraut and boiled potatoes, black pudding (Träipen), sausages with mashed potatoes and horseradish, and green bean soup (Bouneschlupp). French cuisine is prominent on many menus, and to a lesser extent so are German and Belgian cuisines.

Alcohol
A number of white and sparkling wines are produced in Luxembourg, on the north bank of the Moselle, which has a winemaking history dating back to the Romans. Luxembourg is known for making several different kinds of wine including Riesling, Pinot gris, Pinot noir, Pinot blanc, Auxerrois, Rivaner, Elbling, Gewürztraminer, and Crémant de Luxembourg. Authentic Luxembourg wine can be identified by the National Mark.
Luxembourg has a fair number of breweries, given its tiny size. Imported beer, however, is increasingly gaining control of the beer market in Luxembourg. During the 1970s and 1980s, over 600,000 hectoliters (almost 16 million US gallons) of beer were brewed each year. The peak was reached in 1976 when over 800,000 hectoliters of beer were brewed, and since then the amount has been decreasing. In 2001, production dropped below 400,000 hectoliters for the first time since 1950. Some beers are currently made in Luxembourg, including Battin Edelpils, Battin Extra, Brasserie Battin, Bière Blonde and others at the Restaurant Beierhaascht, Bofferding Lager, Brasserie Bofferding, Héngeschter, Cornelyshaff, Diekirch Premium, InBev-owned Brasserie de Luxembourg Mousel-Diekirch SA, Simon Dinkel and others at the Brasserie Simon. The Brasserie de Redang also brewed beer for five years, but closed in 2005.

Specialties
These are some specialties of Luxembourg:

Thüringer - Inexpensive, small sausages that taste like a spicy version of the German bratwurst. They are often sold by street vendors and at roadside stands. New regulations prohibit the use of the word "Thüringer" as it is now regionally protected and reserved to sausages produced in the German free state of Thuringia. They are now commonly referred to as "Grillwurscht" (Lëtzebuerger) or "Grillinger".
Bouneschlupp - A green bean soup.
Gromperekichelcher - A carefully spiced potato pancake with chopped onions and parsley, then deep-fried. They are available at roadside stands as well.
Éisleker Ham - Smoke-cured raw ham, said to look like the Italian Prosciutto crudo, sliced paper-thin and commonly served with fresh bread.
Kachkéis (cooked cheese) - A soft cheese spread.
Pâté - A spreadable paste, usually made of meat but vegetarian versions exist.
Quetschentaart - A plum tart; along with peach, cherry, and pear tarts, it is a typical dessert and can be found in any pastry shop or restaurant.

Sports
Football
Football is the most popular sport in Luxembourg. Football in Luxembourg is governed by the Luxembourg Football Federation (FLF), which is a member of FIFA and UEFA. The FLF organises the men's, women's, and futsal national teams.
The Luxembourg National Division is the premier domestic sports League in the country. Luxembourg was amongst the first countries in the world to be introduced to football, with the National Division being established in 1913, and the national team playing its first match in 1911.
The game of football is the most popular sport in the whole country of Luxembourg (especially in the south), having developed earliest in the industrial Red Lands and Luxembourg City. Only once has the National Division been won by a team not from south of the country. Historically, Jeunesse Esch has been Luxembourg's most successful domestic club, having won the National Division on 27 occasions out of 93. Since 2000, the league has been dominated by F91 Dudelange, which has won the league on six of the past eight occasions.
The national team, nicknamed D'Roud Léiwen ('The Red Lions'), ranked among the weakest in the world in the 2000s and early 2010s. As of February 2024, the team has never qualified for either a World Cup or a European Championship. Under trainer Luc Holtz, the Red Lions have gained more prominence, attaining their highest ever FIFA ranking at 82nd in 2018, and achieving results that have included a 1-0 victory over Ireland in 2021, and a relatively successful qualifying campaign for the 2024 European Championship. Luxembourg's most famous past players include Louis Pilot and Guy Hellers, both of whom also coached the national team after ending their playing careers.

Cricket
Traditional events
The dancing procession of Echternach is a festival which takes place annually. Dancers process through the streets of Echternach. The procession was inscribed as the hopping procession of Echternach on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2010.
Schueberfouer

References
External links

Luxembourg's official cultural portal
Luxembourg American Cultural Society
The Breweries of Luxembourg: beers, history, styles
Food and Drink in Luxembourg
Luxembourg Recipes

## Cuisine of Luxembourg
Luxembourgish cuisine reflects the country's position between the Latin and Germanic countries, influenced by the cuisines of neighbouring France, Belgium and Germany. Recently, it has been influenced by the country's many Italian and Portuguese immigrants. As in Germany, most traditional, everyday Luxembourg dishes are of peasant origin, in contrast to the more sophisticated French fare.

Food
Luxembourg has many delicacies. In addition to French pâtisseries, cake and fruit pies, local pastries include the Pretzel, a Lent speciality; Quetscheflued, a zwetschge tart; verwurelt Gedanken or Verwurelter, small powdered sugar-coated doughnuts; and Äppelklatzen, apples en croûte. Luxembourg's cheese speciality is Kachkéis or Cancoillotte, a soft cheese spread.
Fish from the local rivers such as trout, pike, and crayfish are the basis for dishes such as F'rell am Rèisleck (trout in Riesling sauce), Hiecht mat Kraiderzooss (pike in green sauce) and Kriibsen (crayfish), usually prepared in a Riesling sauce. Another favourite is Fritür or friture de la Moselle, small fried fish from the River Moselle, accompanied by a local Moselle white wine.
Meat dishes include cold Éisleker Ham, literally Oesling ham, from the mountainous north of the country, first marinated for a couple of weeks and then smoked for several days. It is usually served thinly sliced with chipped potatoes and salad. Perhaps the most traditional of all Luxembourg meat dishes is Judd mat Gaardebounen, smoked collar of pork with broad beans. The pork is soaked overnight, then boiled with vegetables and spices. Served in copious slices together with the beans and boiled potatoes, it is considered to be the national dish of Luxembourg. Hong am Rèisleck, similar to the Alsatian coq au Riesling, consists of browned chicken pieces simmered in white wine with vegetables, spices and mushrooms. Huesenziwwi or civet de lièvre is a jugged hare dish served during the hunting season.
Other dishes include liver dumplings (quenelle) with sauerkraut and boiled potatoes, Träipen (black pudding) with apple sauce, sausages with mashed potatoes and horseradish, and green bean soup (Bouneschlupp). French cuisine is featured prominently on many menus, as well as certain dishes from Germany and Belgium.

Other notable foods
Other Luxembourg specialties include:

Thüringer—Sausages that taste like a spicy version of the German bratwurst. The use of the word "Thüringer" is now reserved for sausages produced in German Thuringia. Officially they are now Lëtzebuerger Grillwurscht or Luxembourg grill sausages.
Gromperekichelcher—A carefully spiced potato pancake with chopped onions and parsley, then deep-fried.
Tierteg—Another kind of potato pancake made with sauerkraut.
Rieslingspaschtéit—A popular loaf-shaped meat pie prepared with Riesling wine and aspic, typically served in slices.
Pâté—A spreadable paste, usually made of meat though vegetarian versions exist.
Quetschentaart—A plum tart; it, along with peach, cherry, and pear tarts are typical desserts and can be found in any pastry shop or restaurant.
Öennenzop—Onion soup that is usually served with cheese toast.

Wine and beer
Wine, mostly dry white wine, and sparkling wine is produced in Luxembourg, along the north bank of the Moselle, which has a winemaking history dating back to the Romans. The main varieties are Riesling, Pinot gris, Pinot blanc, Chardonnay, Auxerrois, Gewürztraminer, Rivaner, Elbling, Pinot noir, and Crémant de Luxembourg. The Marque Nationale, on the rear of every bottle of Luxembourg wine, confirms its origin and states its quality level.
Beer, which is quite a popular drink in Luxembourg, is produced locally at three large breweries as well as in a couple of smaller establishments. Most of the beer brewed in Luxembourg is lager but there are also a number of special beers as well as beers without alcohol and Christmas beer in December. The main brands of beer are Bofferding, who also produce Battin; Mousel and Diekirch, who share the same brewery in Diekirch; and Simon. Since the 2000s there has been a resurgence of local microbreweries creating craft beer such as, Beierhaascht, Ourdaller and Grand Brewing.

See also
Food portal

References
Further reading
Georges Hausemer: Culinary Luxembourg: Country, People & Cuisine, photographer Guy Hoffman, Editions Guy Binsfeld, Luxembourg, 2009, pp. 240 ISBN 2-87954-052-6
Léa Linster and Simone van de Voort: Best of Lea Linster Cuisiniere, 2003, Munsbach: Ottweiler Druckerei, 177 pp. ISBN 2-9599-85427 (in German)

External links

Luxembourg cuisine from Mycitycuisine.org with links to many traditional recipes.
Article about Luxembourgish cuisine on the official page of the 2005 Luxembourgish Presidency of the Council of the EU
Luxembourgish recipes on commerzbank.lu
Luxembourgish recipes on 2travelandeat.com (in French)

## List of museums in Luxembourg
This is a list of museums in Luxembourg.

Museums in all of Luxembourg
A Gadder
Abbey Museum
Am Tunnel
Casino Luxembourg
European Museum Schengen
General Patton Museum
Industry and Railway Park Fond-de-Gras
Konschthal Esch
Kulturhuef Asbl
Luxembourgish Aviation Museum
Luxembourg City History Museum
Luxembourg Science Center
MNM Rumelange
MUDAM
Muerbelsmillen
Musée de l'Ardoise
Musée Automobile - Conservatoire National de Véhicules Historiques
Musée de la caricature
Musée Dräi Eechelen
Musee the Family of Man
Musée d'Histoire(s) Diekirch
Musée Littéraire 'Victor Hugo'
Musée A Possen
Musee Rural
Musée Rural Asbl
Musée Rural Binsfeld
Museum-Memorial of Deportation
Luxembourg Science Center, Differdange
National Audiovisual Centre
National Mining Museum, Luxembourg
National Museum of History and Art
National Museum of Military History (Luxembourg)
National Museum of Natural History (Luxembourg)
National Resistance Museum, Luxembourg
Photothèque (Luxembourg)
Prehistory Museum, Echternach
Rural and Artisanal Museum
Thillenvogtei
Tram and Bus Museum
Tudor Museum
Valentiny Foundation
Vianden City History Museum
Villa Vauban
Waassertuerm + Pomhouse
Wiltz Castle
Wine Museum, Ehnen

References
Travel Luxembourg (warning, autoplays music)

See also

List of museums
Tourism in Luxembourg
Culture of Luxembourg

## Famous Holiday Destinations
- Cap-Haïtien, Haiti
- Nassau, Bahamas
- Nassau, Bahamas (Second mention)
- St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands
- St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands (Second mention)

## Famous Museums
- Louvre Museum, Paris, France
- The British Museum, London, UK
- Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, USA
- The Vatican Museums, Vatican City
- Prado Museum, Madrid, Spain

## Local Desserts
- Waterzooi
- Lamatsch
- Crème Brûlée
- Choucroute Garnie
- Apfelstrudel
