--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Laos
FILE_NAME: country_laos.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:47:16
----------------

# Laos

## General Overview
Laos, officially the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR), is a country in Mainland Southeast Asia, and the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia. It is bordered by Myanmar and China to the northwest, Vietnam to the east, Cambodia to the southeast, and Thailand to the west and southwest. Laos has a population of more than 7.5 million, and its capital and most populous city is Vientiane. It has three UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the town of Luang Prabang, the temple complex of Vat Phou, and the Plain of Jars. The 2021 completion of the Boten–Vientiane railway, Laotian section of the Laos–China Railway, connects Vientiane to Kunming. Laos participates in the Greater Mekong Subregion economic cooperation programme and is a member of ASEAN, the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement, East Asia Summit, La Francophonie, and the World Trade Organization.
The kingdom of Lan Xang existed from the 13th to 18th centuries and was a hub for overland trade through its territory. In 1707 it split into three kingdoms: Luang Prabang, Vientiane, and Champasak. In 1893, these kingdoms were unified under French rule as part of French Indochina. Laos was under Japanese administration during World War II, gaining independence in 1945 before returning to French administration until achieving autonomy in 1949. It regained full independence in 1953 as the Kingdom of Laos, with a constitutional monarchy under Sisavang Vong. A civil war from 1959 to 1975 saw the communist Pathet Lao (supported by China, North Vietnam, and the Soviet Union) oppose the Royal Lao Armed Forces (backed by the United States). It ended with the Lao People's Revolutionary Party's establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic in 1975.

Geography
Laos is the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia and lies mostly between latitudes 14° and 23°N, and longitudes 100° and 108°E. The forested landscape consists mostly of mountains, the highest of which is Phou Bia at 2,818 metres (9,245 ft), with some plains and plateaus. The Mekong River forms a part of the western boundary with Thailand, where the mountains of the Annamite Range form most of the eastern border with Vietnam and the Luang Prabang Range the northwestern border with the Thai highlands. There are two plateaus, the Xiangkhoang in the north and the Bolaven Plateau at the southern end. 
In 1993, the government set aside 21% of the land area for habitat conservation preservation. Laos had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.59/10, ranking it 98th globally out of 172 countries. It is one of three nations in the opium poppy growing region known as the "Golden Triangle". According to the October 2007 UNODC fact book Opium Poppy Cultivation in South East Asia, the poppy cultivation area was 15 square kilometres (5.8 sq mi), down from 18 square kilometres (6.9 sq mi) in 2006.

Climate
The climate is mostly tropical savanna and influenced by the monsoon pattern. There is a rainy season from May to October, followed by a dry season from November to April. The latter two months of the climatologically defined dry season are hotter than the earlier four months.

Wildlife
Laos, with its forests and river systems, is home to an array of wildlife. National parks like Nam Et-Phou Louey and Nakai-Nam Theun are refuges, supporting endangered species such as the northern white-cheeked gibbon and the saola. These forests shelter more than 50 mammal species and nearly 300 bird species, along with a variety of reptiles and amphibians. Some of the native species are listed as endangered, from Asian elephants to gibbons and tigers, and conservation efforts are in place to aid such species.

Administrative divisions
Laos is divided into 17 provinces and one prefecture, which includes the capital city Vientiane. 

Note: (a) the 2015 Census total was estimated to have an under-enumeration of 2.76%, resulting in a revised 2015 estimate of 6,671,680.

History
Prehistory
In 2009, an anatomically modern human skull was recovered from the Tam Pa Ling Cave in the Annamite Mountains. The skull is at least 46,000 years old, making it the oldest modern human fossil found in Southeast Asia as of 2009. Stone artefacts including Hoabinhian types have been found at sites dating to the Pleistocene in northern Laos.
Archaeological evidence suggests an agriculturist society developed during the 4th millennium BCE, a society in which bronze objects appeared around 1500 BCE, and iron tools were known from 700 BCE. The proto-historic period is characterised by contact with Chinese and Indian civilisations. According to linguistic and other historical evidence, Tai-speaking tribes migrated southwestward to the territories of Laos and Thailand from Guangxi sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries.

Lan Xang
The kingdom of Lan Xang (" a million elephants") was founded in the 13th century by a prince, Fa Ngum, whose father had his family exiled from the Khmer Empire. Ngum, with 10,000 Khmer troops, conquered some principalities in the Mekong River basin, culminating in the capture of Vientiane. He was descended from a line of kings that traced back to Khoun Boulom. Ngum made Theravada Buddhism the state religion. His ministers, unable to tolerate his ruthlessness, forced him into exile to what later became the Thai province of Nan in 1373, where he died. Ngum's eldest son ascended to the throne under the name Samsenethai and reigned for 43 years. Lan Xang became a trade centre during Samsenthai's reign, and after his death in 1421 it collapsed into warring factions for nearly a century.
In 1520 Photisarath came to the throne and moved the capital from Luang Prabang to Vientiane to avoid a Burmese invasion. Setthathirath became king in 1548 and ordered the construction of That Luang. Settathirath disappeared in the mountains on his way back from a military expedition into Cambodia, and Lan Xang fell into more than 70 years of "instability", a period marked by a Burmese invasion and civil war. 
In 1637, when Sourigna Vongsa ascended the throne, Lan Xang further expanded its frontiers. When he died without an heir, the kingdom split into three principalities. Between 1763 and 1769, Burmese armies overran northern Laos and annexed Luang Prabang, while the Kingdom of Champasak eventually came under Siamese suzerainty. Anouvong was installed as a vassal king of Vientiane by the Siamese. He encouraged a renaissance of Lao fine arts and literature and improved relations with Luang Prabang. Under Vietnamese pressure, he rebelled against the Siamese in 1826. The rebellion failed, and Vientiane was ransacked. Anouvong was taken to Bangkok as a prisoner, where he died.
In a time period where the acquisition of humans was a priority over the ownership of land, the warfare of Southeast Asia revolved around the seizing of people and resources from its enemies. A Siamese military campaign in Laos in 1876 was described by a British observer as having been "transformed into slave-hunting raids on a large scale".

French Laos
In the 19th century, Luang Prabang was ransacked by the Chinese Black Flag Army. France rescued King Oun Kham and included Luang Prabang to the protectorate of French Indochina. The Kingdom of Champasak and the territory of Vientiane were later also added to the protectorate. King Sisavang Vong of Luang Prabang became ruler of a unified Laos under French control of the region, and Vientiane once again became the capital.
Laos produced tin, rubber, and coffee, while the country never accounted for more than 1% of French Indochina's exports. By 1940, around 600 French citizens lived in Laos. Under French rule, the Vietnamese were encouraged to migrate to Laos; this was seen by the French colonists as a rational solution to a labour shortage within the confines of an Indochina-wide colonial space. By 1943, the Vietnamese population stood at nearly 40,000, forming the majority in some cities of Laos and having the right to elect its own leaders. As a result, 53% of the population of Vientiane, 85% of Thakhek, and 62% of Pakse were Vietnamese; the exception was Luang Prabang, where the population was predominantly Lao. In 1945, the French drew up a plan to move some of the Vietnamese to the Vientiane Plain, Savannakhet region, and the Bolaven Plateau, which was derailed by the Japanese invasion of Indochina. Otherwise, according to Martin Stuart-Fox, the Lao might well have lost control over their own country.
During World War II , Vichy France, Thailand, Imperial Japan and Free France occupied Laos. On 9 March 1945, a nationalist group declared Laos independent, with Luang Prabang as its capital; on 7 April two battalions of Japanese troops occupied the city. The Japanese attempted to force Sisavang Vong (the king of Luang Prabang) to declare Laotian independence, and on 8 April he instead declared an end to Laos's status as a French protectorate. The king then secretly sent Prince Kindavong to represent Laos to the Allied forces and Prince Sisavang as representative to the Japanese. When Japan surrendered, some Lao nationalists (including Prince Phetsarath) declared Lao independence, and by 1946 French troops had reoccupied the country and conferred autonomy on Laos. 
During the First Indochina War, the Indochinese Communist Party formed the Pathet Lao independence organization. The Pathet Lao began a war against the French colonial forces with the aid of the Vietnamese independence organization, the Viet Minh. In 1950, the French were forced to give Laos semi-autonomy as an "associated state" within the French Union. France remained in de facto control until 22 October 1953, when Laos gained full independence as a constitutional monarchy.

Independence, and communist state
The First Indochina War took place across French Indochina and eventually led to French defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the signing of peace accord for Laos at the Geneva Conference of 1954. In 1960, amidst a series of rebellions in the Kingdom of Laos, fighting broke out between the Royal Lao Army and the communist Pathet Lao, a group allied with North Vietnam and the Soviet Union. A second provisional government of "National Union" formed by Prince Souvanna Phouma and the Pathet Lao in 1956 was unsuccessful, and by 1959 the situation turned into civil war between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao. The Pathet Lao guerillas were backed militarily by the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) and the Viet Cong.
Laos became drawn into the Vietnam War, with parts of Laos were invaded and occupied by North Vietnam since 1958 for use as a supply route for its war against South Vietnam. In response, the United States initiated an aerial bombing campaign against the PAVN positions, supported regular and irregular anti-communist forces in Laos, and supported incursions into Laos by the Army of the Republic of Vietnam. Aerial bombardments against the PAVN/Pathet Lao forces were carried out to prevent the collapse of the Kingdom of Laos central government and to deny them use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, the Vietnamese supply route that passed through Laos and Cambodia, to attack US forces in South Vietnam. Between 1964 and 1973, the US dropped more than 2 million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly as much as all the bombs dropped during World War II combined (American bombers dropped 2.1 million tons of bombs on Europe and Asia during World War II). This makes Laos the most heavily bombed country in history relative to the size of its population (per capita); The New York Times notes this was "nearly a ton for every person in Laos". Some 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country. Unexploded ordnance, including cluster munitions and mines, kill or maim approximately 50 people every year. As a result Laos became an advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in 2010. 
In 1975, the Pathet Lao overthrew the royalist government, forcing King Savang Vatthana to abdicate on 2 December 1975. He later died in a re-education camp in Vietnam. Between 20,000 and 62,000 Laotians died during the civil war. On 2 December 1975, after taking control of the country, the Pathet Lao government under Kaysone Phomvihane as head of the party renamed the country as the Lao People's Democratic Republic; the government signed agreements giving Vietnam the right to station armed forces and to appoint advisers to assist in overseeing the country. The ties between Laos and Vietnam were formalised via a treaty signed in 1977, which has since provided direction for Laotian foreign policy and provides the basis for Vietnamese involvement in Laotian political and economic life. In 1979, Laos was requested by Vietnam to end relations with the People's Republic of China; this led to isolation in trade by China, the United States, and other countries. In 1979, there were 50,000 PAVN troops stationed in Laos and as many as 6,000 civilian Vietnamese officials including 1,000 directly attached to the ministries in Vientiane.
The conflict between Hmong rebels and Laos continued in certain areas of Laos. In 1977, a communist newspaper promised the party would hunt down the "American collaborators" and their families "to the last root". As many as 200,000 Hmong went into exile in Thailand, with some ending up in the US. Other Hmong fighters hid out in mountains in Xiangkhouang Province for years, with a remnant emerging from the jungle in 2003.

Politics
The LPDR is a unitary communist state that self-designates as a people's democratic state, meaning that it officially tries to transition the country from capitalism to socialism before commencing to transition from socialism to communism. In The Economist's Democracy Index 2016, Laos was classified as an "authoritarian regime", ranking lowest of the 9 ASEAN nations included in the study.

Lao People's Revolutionary Party
The Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) is the founding and ruling party of the LPDR. The leading role of the LPRP over the political system is enshrined in its constitution by stating "The rights of the multi-ethnic people to be the masters of the country are exercised and ensured through the functioning of the political system with the Lao People's Revolutionary Party as its leading nucleus." All state organs operate under the leadership of the LPRP; because of the party's organizational principle of democratic centralism, all party members in state organs are required to implement the decisions of the Central Committee of the LPRP. The party establishes party groups within state organs, which the Central Committee supervises through its Secretariat and the Organisation Commission.
The highest organ of the LPRP is the party congress, which meets at least every fifth year. It elects the members and candidates of the Central Committee. At its first session after a party congress, the Central Committee elects its central leading organs: the Politburo, the Secretariat, the Inspection Commission, and the Defence and Public Security Commission (DPSC). It also elects the party leader, the general secretary of the LPRP Central Committee. The general secretary leads the work of the Politburo while concurrently serving as chairman of the DPSC. They co-leads the Secretariat with the Permanent Member of the LPRP Secretariat. These organs are delegated specific powers of the Central Committee when the Central Committee is not in session; the Politburo is the party's highest decision-making organ when the Central Committee, the Conference, and the Congress are not in session. The party heads are elected by a session of the Central Committee.
The LPRP, as the leading force of the political system, has a legal monopoly on state power. According to scholar Martin Stuart-Fox, control is cemented by populating every state organ, bureaucracy, transmission belt mass organization, and the Lao People's Armed Forces (LPAF) with party members. The LPAF is tasked by the state constitution to defend the gains of the revolution. The LPRP's statute states that political leadership over the military and other security forces is in the hands of the DPSC, which maintains direct, united, and full control of the LPAF.

National Assembly
The National Assembly is the supreme state organ of power and formally holds the unified powers of the state. It is the only state organ that can adopt or amend the communist state constitution, which was adopted on 14 August 1991. The National Assembly is officially considered the embodiment of popular sovereignty since it is elected through elections in which candidates are vetted by the National Election Committee. The LPRP, state organs, the Lao Front for National Development as the largest transmission belt mass organization in the country, and other transmission belt mass organizations are allowed to nominate candidates to the National Election Committee, which can either approve or reject them.
The National Assembly is not a permanent organ, and in between its sessions it is led by its permanent organ, the Standing Committee. As the state's highest organ, all other state organs are inferior to the National Assembly and accountable to it per democratic centralism since, according to the constitution, "The National Assembly, the Local People's Assemblies and other state organisations are established and function in accordance with the principle of democratic centralism." As a result, the National Assembly establishes all other state organs that make up the unified state apparatus per the division of labour of state organs. The constitution has created the following hierarchy of state organs: the National Assembly as the highest, followed by the president of Laos, the government of Laos, the system of people's councils and their governments, the People's Supreme Court, the People's Supreme Procuratorate, the State Inspection Authority, the State Audit Organisation, and the National Election Committee. All these organs are, in theory, accountable to the National Assembly.
The National Assembly and its Standing Committee are headed by a chair and vice chairs. The chair concurrently serves ex officio as a member of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly, the Central Committee, and the Politburo. The National Assembly is empowered to adopt and amend laws and legislation. It can decide whether Laos should approve, withdraw, or cancel international treaties. The National Assembly is responsible for adopting a five-year work plan for itself and for all inferior state organs. It can rescind legislation issued by other state organs if it conflicts with adopted laws or the constitution. The National Assembly also adopts a five-year plan for economic development, known as the National Socio-Economic Development Plan, and a state budget plan. It has the right to hold individuals it elects or appoints to state organs accountable for their work and to check whether these individuals are implementing the policies adopted by the National Assembly. Since it is not in permanent session, the National Assembly delegates some of its powers to its Standing Committee under the constitution, and it can delegate specific powers through a majority vote at one of its sessions. All inferior state organs and the Lao Front for National Development can propose legislation and amendments to the constitution to the National Assembly.

The president is the head of state and concurrently serves as the LPRP general secretary. The president is bound by a term limit of two consecutive electoral terms. The president is empowered to promulgate the constitution and law, issue presidential edicts and decrees, convene and preside over special sessions of the government, and attend sessions of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly if deemed necessary. The president can instigate the appointment, reassignment, and removal of deputy prime ministers and members of the government, the vice president of the People's Supreme Court and the Deputy People's Supreme Procurator, the vice president of the State Audit Organisation, and the vice president of the State Inspection Authority on the approval of the National Assembly. Should the president be incapacitated, the vice president takes over duties.
The government is the supreme executive and administrative organ of state power and is headed by the prime minister, who serves as head of government. The prime minister is elected by the National Assembly on the president's recommendation. No member of the government may serve more than two electoral terms. The members of the government are dually responsible to the president and the National Assembly, and can be removed by the National Assembly through a vote of no confidence. The government is responsible for leading state economic policy and administering the Laotian state on behalf of the National Assembly and the LPRP.
The National Assembly heads the system of people's councils, the system of state organs of power, that controls the state apparatus at lower levels, and these lower-level people's councils elect the people's governments at their corresponding level. People's councils exist at the provincial, district, and village levels. Their powers mirror those of the National Assembly in their own jurisdiction. The people's governments at the provincial, district, and village levels are elected by the people's councils, and are accountable to them and the government as the supreme executive and administrative organ of state power.
Laos has two judicial organs: the People's Supreme Court (PSC), the supreme judicial organ, and the People's Supreme Procuratorate (PSP), the supreme procuratorial organ. Both are considered political organs because they implement the political line adopted by the National Assembly, which operates under the LPRP's leadership. The PSC is solely focused on adjudication. It heads the unified system of judicial organs and leads nationwide judicial work. The PSP monitors the implementation of the constitution and laws in all state organs and society at large. It is also empowered to initiate investigations against suspected wrongdoers and file cases against defendants in court.
Auditing and anti-corruption work are the responsibility of the State Audit Organisation (SAO), the supreme auditing organ, and the State Inspection Authority (SIA), the supreme supervisory organ. SAO is tasked with conducting an audit of the use of the state budget, finances, and use of state assets. It is responsible for auditing all state organs, transmission belt mass organisations, and organisations financed by the state budget, state funds, or state assets. The SAO president is responsible to the National Assembly and its permanent organ, and the prime minister. The SIA leads anti-corruption work in all state organisations and organisations financed from the state budget, state funds, and state assets.
The National Election Committee (NEC) is a non-permanent organ elected by the National Assembly. It is responsible for organising the elections of the people's councils and the National Assembly. The NEC sets the date of election day, which is promulgated through a presidential decree. It is also responsible for disseminating information about the elections to the public. The NEC also plans the composition of the National Assembly. For the 2026 elections, for example, it set a target that at least 30% of elected members were to be female.

Foreign relations
The foreign relations of Laos after the takeover by the Pathet Lao in December 1975 were characterised by a hostile posture toward the West, with the government of the LPDR aligning itself with the Soviet Bloc, maintaining ties with the Soviet Union and depending on the Soviets for most of its foreign assistance.
Laos's emergence from international isolation has been marked through expanded relations with other countries including Russia, China, Thailand, Australia, Germany, Italy, Japan and Switzerland. Trade relations with the United States were normalised in November 2004 through Congress approved legislation. Laos was admitted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in July 1997 and acceded to the World Trade Organization in 2016. In 2005, it attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.

Human rights
Ostensibly, the constitution that was promulgated in 1991 and amended in 2003 contains safeguards for human rights. For example, Article 8 states that Laos is a multinational state and is committed to equality between ethnic groups. The constitution contains provisions for gender equality, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of press and freedom of assembly. In 2009 Laos ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, nine years after signing the treaty. The stated policy objectives of the Laotian government and international donors remain focused upon achieving sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction.
An organisation raised concerns in relation to freedom of expression, prison conditions, restrictions on freedom of religions, protection of refugees and asylum-seekers, and the death penalty. Laos has been cited as an origin country for human trafficking, with some citizens victims of sex trafficking. The government sometimes controls media channels to prevent critique of its actions. Citizens who have criticised the government have been subjected to enforced disappearances, arrests and torture.

Economy
Pakse has experienced growth based on cross-border trade with Thailand and Vietnam. In 2009, the Obama administration in the US declared Laos was no longer a communist state and lifted bans on Lao companies receiving financing from the US Export-Import Bank. In 2016, China was the biggest foreign investor in the Lao economy, having invested US$5.395 billion since 1989, according to the Laos Ministry of Planning and Investment's 1989–2014 report. Thailand (invested US$4.489 billion) and Vietnam (invested US$3.108 billion) are the second and third largest investors respectively.
Subsistence agriculture accounts for half of the GDP and provides 80% of employment. 4% of the country is arable land, and 0.3% used as permanent crop land, the lowest percentage in the Greater Mekong Subregion. The irrigated areas account for 28% of area under cultivation which, in turn, represents 12% of the agricultural land in 2012. Rice dominates agriculture, with about 80% of the arable land area used for growing rice. Approximately 77% of farm households are self-sufficient in rice.
Laos imports petroleum and gas. The government hopes to attract foreign investment to develop the deposits of coal, gold, bauxite, tin, copper, and other metals. The mining industry of Laos has received attention with foreign direct investments. More than 540 mineral deposits of gold, copper, zinc, lead and other minerals have been identified, explored and mined. The water resources and mountainous terrain enable it to produce and export quantities of hydroelectric energy. Of the potential capacity of approximately 18,000 megawatts, around 8,000 megawatts have been committed for export to Thailand and Vietnam. As of 2021, Laos continues to rely on fossil fuels, coal in particular, in domestic electricity production.
In 2018, the country ranked 139th on the Human Development Index, indicating medium development. According to the Global Hunger Index (2018), Laos ranks as the 36th hungriest nation in the world out of the list of the 52 nations with the worst hunger situations. In 2019, the UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights conducted an official visit to Laos and found that the top-down approach to economic growth and poverty alleviation "is all too often counterproductive, leading to impoverishment and jeopardizing the rights of the poor and marginalized."
The largest beer brand in the country, Beerlao, started being exported in 2017 to more than 20 countries worldwide. It is produced by the Lao Brewery Company.

Tourism
The tourism sector has grown from 80,000 international visitors in 1990, to 1.876 million in 2010, when tourism had been expected to rise to US$1.5857 billion by 2020. In 2010, 1 in 11 jobs was in the tourism sector. Export earnings from international visitors and tourism goods are expected to generate 16% of total exports or US$270.3 million in 2010, growing in nominal terms to US$484.2 million (12.5% of the total) in 2020. The European Council on Trade and Tourism awarded the country the "World Best Tourist Destination" designation for 2013 for architecture and history. In 2024, tourist numbers topped 5 million, contributing over US$1 billion to the economy.
The Laotian National Tourism Administration, related government agencies and the private sector are working together to realise the vision put forth in the country's National Ecotourism Strategy and Action Plan. This includes decreasing the environmental and cultural impact of tourism; increasing awareness in the importance of ethnic groups and biological diversity; providing a source of income to conserve, sustain and manage the Laotian protected area network and cultural heritage sites; and emphasising the need for tourism zoning and management plans for sites that will be developed as ecotourism destinations.

Transportation
Laos's first railway line, a 3-km long metre-gauge railway that connects southern Vientiane to Thailand, opened in 2009. The 422-km long Boten–Vientiane railway runs from Vientiane to Boten at the northern border with China, built as part of China's Belt and Road Initiative.
In 2025, Vientiane started the implementation process for a Bus Rapid Transport system (BRT), which was put on hold in December 2025 due to organisational complications. It came as part of a plan for sustainable urban transport in Vientiane.
93% of households have a telephone, either fixed line or mobile. Electricity is available to 93% of the population.

Water supply
According to the World Bank data conducted in 2014, Laos has met the Millennium Development Goal targets on water and sanitation regarding the UNICEF/WHO Joint Monitoring Programme. As of 2018, there are approximately 1.9 million of Lao's population who could not access an improved water supply and 2.4 million people without access to improved sanitation.
Laos has made progress increasing access to sanitation. In 1990, 8% of the rural population had access to improved sanitation. Access rose from 10% in 1995 to 38% in 2008. Between 1995 and 2008, approximately 1,232,900 more people had access to improved sanitation in rural areas. The authorities have developed an innovative regulatory framework for public–private partnership contracts signed with enterprises, in parallel with more conventional regulation of state-owned water enterprises.

Demographics
The population in 2024 is estimated to be 7,769,819, with an approximately even distribution of females and males (49.8% female). This makes Laos the 103rd most populous country in the world.

Ethnicity
The people of Laos are categorised by their distribution by elevation (lowlands, midlands and uplands), as this somewhat correlates with ethnic groupings. More than half of the population is ethnic Lao—the principal lowland inhabitants. The Lao belong to the Tai linguistic group who began migrating south from China in the first millennium AD. 10% belong to other "lowland" groups, which together with the Lao people make up the Lao Loum (lowland people).
In the central and southern mountains, Mon-Khmer-speaking groups, known as Lao Theung or mid-slope Laotians, predominate. Other terms are Khmu, Khamu (Kammu) or Kha as the Lao Loum refer to them to indicate their Austroasiatic language affiliation. The latter is considered pejorative, meaning 'slave'. They were the indigenous inhabitants of northern Laos. Some Vietnamese, Laotian Chinese and Thai minorities remain, particularly in the towns, and some left after independence in the 1940s, some of whom relocated either to Vietnam, Hong Kong, or to France. Lao Theung constitute about 30% of the population.
Hill people and minority cultures of Laos such as the Hmong, Yao (Mien) (Hmong-Mien), Dao, Shan, and Tibeto-Burman speaking peoples have lived in isolated regions of Laos for years. Mountain/hill tribes of mixed ethno/cultural-linguistic heritage are found in northern Laos, which include the Lua and Khmu people who are indigenous to Laos. Collectively, they are known as Lao Soung or highland Laotians. Lao Soung account for about 10% of the population.

Languages
The official language is Lao, a language of the Tai-Kadai language family. The Lao alphabet, which evolved sometime between the 13th and 14th centuries, was derived from the Khmer script. Languages like Khmu (Austroasiatic) and Hmong (Hmong-Mien) are spoken by minorities, particularly in the midland and highland areas. A number of Laotian sign languages are used in areas with higher rates of congenital deafness.
French is used in government and commerce, and Laos is a member of the French-speaking organisation of La Francophonie. The organisation estimated in 2010 that there were 173,800 French speakers in Laos. English, the language of the ASEAN, has become increasingly studied.

Religion
66% of Laotians were Theravada Buddhist, 1.5% Christian, 0.1% Muslim, 0.1% Jewish, and 32.3% were from other religions or traditions (mostly practitioners of Tai folk religion, or Satsana Phi) in 2010.

Health
Female life expectancy at birth was at 70.7 years and male was at 67.4 years in 2025. Healthy life expectancy was 54 years in 2007. Government expenditure on health is about 4% of GDP, about US$18 (PPP) in 2006.

Education
The adult literacy rate for women in 2017 was 62.9%; for adult men, 78.1%. In 2004, the net primary enrolment rate was 84%. Laos was ranked 109th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.

Culture
Cuisine
Sticky rice (khao niao) is a staple food. There are traditions and rituals associated with rice production in environments and among ethnic groups. For example, Khammu farmers in Luang Prabang plant the rice variety khao kam near the farm house in memory of dead parents, or at the edge of the rice field to indicate that parents are alive.
The Lao national dish is Larb (also spelled Laap or Laab), a dish in which chopped meat is blended with toasted rice and then seasoned with herbs, fish sauce, and lime.
Other traditional dishes include Tam Mak Hoong, or green papaya salad, Khao Poon or rice noodle soup, and Sai Oua sausadge.

Cinema
The first feature-length film made after the monarchy was abolished is Gun Voice from the Plain of Jars directed by Somchith Pholsena in 1983, and its release was prevented by a censorship board. A commercial feature-length film was Sabaidee Luang Prabang, made in 2008. The 2017 documentary feature film Blood Road was predominantly shot and produced in Laos with assistance from the government. It was recognised with a News and Documentary Emmy Award in 2018.
Australian filmmaker Kim Mordount's first feature film was made in Laos and features a Laotian cast speaking their native language. Entitled The Rocket, the film appeared at the 2013 Melbourne International Film Festival and won three awards at the Berlin International Film Festival. Examples of Lao feature films that have received international recognition include Lao New Wave Cinema's At the Horizon, directed by Anysay Keola, which was screened at the OzAsia Film Festival, and Lao Art Media's Chanthaly, directed by Mattie Do, which was screened at the 2013 Fantastic Fest. In September 2017, Laos submitted Dearest Sister, Mattie Do's second feature film, to the 90th Academy Awards (or the Oscars) for consideration for Best Foreign Language Film, marking the country's first submission for the Oscars.

As of 2018, Laos has three theatres dedicated to showing films.

Sport
The martial art of muay Lao, the national sport, is a form of kickboxing similar to Thailand's muay Thai, Burmese Lethwei and Cambodian Pradal Serey.

See also
Drug policy in Laos
Energy in Laos
Freedom of the press in Laos
Mass media in Laos
Outline of Laos

Notes
References
Books
Book chapters
Dissertations
Journal entries
Web articles
Footnotes


== External links ==

## Tourism in Laos
Tourism in Laos is a part of the economy of Laos. In 2024, tourist numbers topped 5 million, contributing over US$1 billion to the economy. Tourism is the third largest source of foreign income for the Laos government, behind mining and electricity generation. In 2019, 4.79 million international tourists visited Laos, spending US$931 million, representing 9.1% of the Lao economy, and created employment for 300,000 people.
The top four sources of international tourists in 2019 were Thailand (45%), China (21.3%), Vietnam (19.3%) and South Korea (4.2%).
The Laos-China Railway has facilitated the entry of more tourists, particularly from China, into Laos. The railway opened in 2021, and cross-border service between Laos and China began in 2023. Compared to its neighbour Thailand, Laos is said to be a more difficult country to enter by air, especially via long-haul air routes. In 2024, there were over 46 million airline seats to Thailand, and less than 1.8 million going to Laos. These services typically enter from China or Thailand, meaning visitors may combine their trip with visits to neighbouring countries and not travel only to Laos, due to the need to transit through them to reach Laos.

Statistics
Annual statistics
Notes:

1.^COVID-19 pandemic.
2.^SARS epidemic
3.^September 11 attacks

International visitor arrivals
∗ASEAN nation

References
External links

Laos Cultural Profile (Ministry of Information and Culture/Visiting Arts)
The official Laos Tourism Authority site
Laos virtual tour
Laos Tourism Video

## Culture of Laos
This article describes the cultural aspects of Laos, a landlocked country in Southeast Asia.

Ethnicity
The Lao government recognizes 47 distinct ethnicities, which are further sub-divided into 149 subgroups. Approximately 50% of the total population is ethnic Lao (Lao Loum or Lao Tai); 10% are categorized as Lao Theung or “upland Lao” who are predominantly people of Mon or Khmer ancestry; another 34% are Lao Sung or “mountain Lao,” and are referred to as “hill tribes.” Hill peoples in Laos include the Hmong, Yao (Mien), Akha, and Lahu. Laos is home to communities of Vietnamese and Chinese who make up the 6% remaining.
Anthropologists consider the Lao Loum as a subcategory of the wider “Tai” ethnic group who share genetic, linguistic, and cultural heritage. The Tai family includes the Lao and Thai, and other groups which have been distinguished by their traditional dress and include the Tai Dam (Black Tai), Tai Daeng (Red Tai), and Tai Khao (White Tai). The Lao Loum define themselves based on location, agricultural practice, language and religion. The Lao Loum occupy the Mekong River valleys and cultivate wet rice crops, they are predominantly Theravada Buddhist and have syncretism with traditional animist beliefs.

The Lao Theung include Mon-Khmer peoples which are among the indigenous peoples from the Mekong River valleys. The largest single group (11% or 500,000 people) is Khmu (Khmou, Kmhmu, Khammu, Khamu, Kammu).  Also included in the Lao Theung population are Katang, Bru, Kui, Laven, Mal, Phai, Katu, Lave, Ngae, Jeh, Khuen, Jeng, Alak, Ir, Kasseng, Khlor, Aheu, Bo, Halang, Doan, Hung, Xinh Mul, Khua, Arem, Bit, Chut, Maleng and Mlabri. The Lao Theung peoples are distinguished by dry rice cultivation, and animist beliefs.
The Lao Sung are known as “hill tribe” peoples, and are among the populations to migrate into Laos in the nineteenth century from southern China and Vietnam. The Hmong are the largest group, which are subdivided by traditional dress including the White, Red, Black and Striped Hmong. The Yao (Mien and Lu Mien) are another group of Lao Sung, and distinguish themselves through the incorporation of Taoist deities with their animist beliefs. Other groups of Lao Sung include the Akha, Kaw, Lahu, Kaduo, Lisu, Hani, Phana, Si La, and Kado. The Lao Sung are identified by language, dry rice production, slash-and-burn agriculture, traditional opium production and animist beliefs.

Religion
Laos is approximately 66% Theravada Buddhist, which roughly falls along ethnic lines with the majority of practitioners being Lao Loum. The remainder is largely animist. Other religions are in the minority including Islam and Christianity and represent a combined total of less than 2% of the population.

Buddhism
The That Luang is a stupa with a pyramidal base capped by the representation of a closed lotus blossom which was built to protect relics of the Buddha. The shrine has been rebuilt some times since being created in the thirteenth century by the Khmer, with expansions by King Setthathirath in the 1500s as part of a nationwide building campaign.
There is a belief that merit is transferable among people, thus a daughter or son may make merit for a parent by temporarily entering a monastery. Lay persons are expected to feed and care for the monks of their local community, with the morning processions of monks (tak bat) who walk to collect offerings.  Monks renounce material possessions and labor, thus the community and the monastery (wat) are bound in a mutually reinforcing relationship.

Animism
Collectively the Lao belief in spirits is referred to as Satsana Phi. Phi are the spirits of buildings or territories, natural places, or phenomena; they are ancestral spirits that protect people, or can include malevolent spirits. The phi which are guardian deities of places, or towns are celebrated at festivals with communal gatherings and offerings of food. Some people will have a spirit house on or near their property which is a folk custom used to ensure balance with the natural and supernatural world.
Phi were believed to influence natural phenomena including human illness and so appealing to the phi became a part of identity and religious health over the millennia. Astrology was a part to understanding the natural and spiritual worlds and became a cultural means to enforce social taboos and customs.
Traditionally the Lao Loum believed that ancient mythical serpents known as ngueak inhabited major waterways, carving out the surrounding countryside and protecting key points along rivers or other bodies of water. A name for the Mekong River was Nam Nyai Ngu Luang or "Great River of the Giant Serpent."  Ngueak, and the nāga which have been “tamed” by Buddhism, were believed to bring rains, or change shape, and nāga in particular were believed to be protection spirits which inhabited the cities of Vientiane and Luang Prabang in Lan Xang. Nāga have endured as motifs in myth, legend, temples, and silk weavings.

Literature
The Sin Xay  follows the mythological tale of a king and his kidnapped sister by the Lord of the Nyak. The Thao Hung Thao Cheuang recounts the struggles of the Khmmu and indigenous peoples of Laos at the time of the Tai migrations as told by their mythical king. Other works of Lao epic poetry include the rain legends of the Toad King (Phya Khankhaak) which are retold during the annual Rocket Festival, and the story of Phadaeng Nang Ai which is an epic love poem set across multiple reincarnations.
The Lao have a number of origin legends including the Nithan Khun Borom (Story of Khun Borom) which recounts the creation of the world, and the Nithan Khun Lo which tells how the descendants of Khun Borom settled the lands of mainland Southeast Asia. The national epic of Laos is the Phra Lak Phra Lam and retells the Lao version of the Ramayana  as a previous life of the Buddha. The Vessantara Jataka recalls the past life of a prince, Vessantara, who gives away everything he owns, including his children.
Laos has a tradition of folklore. There are ghost stories, place legends, stories of naga, trickster tales of Xieng Mieng and forms of oral tradition.

Art
The first attempts at preservation outside the local wat occurred with French academics working in the 1900s for the École française d'Extrême-Orient (EFEO), and Prince Phetsarath in the 1950s as part of the Lao Issara. International non-governmental organizations geared toward cultural preservation have been allowed to operate since the 1990s. Some cultural heritage is stored or protected in monasteries throughout the country.  Museums are the Haw Phra Kaew in Vientiane, and the Royal Palace Museum in Luang Prabang.

Weaving
People traditionally raise the silk worms on a diet of mulberry leaves, the silk is woven on hand looms in the north or on foot looms in the south. Each region and ethnic group has their own traditional weaving techniques. In the south weaving is characterized by patterns of elephants, temples, khmer influenced designs and features beadwork. The northeast is known for using raw silk and cotton, and tye-dying raw silk known as matmii or ikat. Central Laos runs along the Mekong River and is known for natural indigo dyes and diamond patterns which symbolize the protective scales of the mythical naga. In the former royal city of Luang Prabang embroidery using gold and silver threads is preserved.

Sculpture
Sculptures of the Buddha were traditionally cast in bronze, silver, gold or thong which is a gold and silver alloy. Wooden Buddha images were made by individuals seeking merit. The sculptures follow conventional forms and mudras found throughout Theravada Southeast Asia. A form is the standing Buddha in a “calling for rain” mudra, with hands at his side in a downward position, and a symmetrical flowing robe on both sides.  Another mudra is standing, with hands crossed in front at the wrists in a “contemplation” mudra. These images have their origins in the sixteenth century, and are further characterized by longer facial features, and thinner more aquiline noses.

A sculpture is the Phra Bang a gold statue from which the city of Luang Pra Bang takes its name. According to legend the Phra Bang was cast in Ceylon, transferred to the Khmer Empire and then came north to Lan Xang at the request of Fa Ngum's Khmer queen. Other Buddha images include the bronze Buddha images found in Wat Ong Teu and Wat Manorom. Smaller images are found at the Haw Phra Kaew, and Wat Sisaket in Vientiane or in temples like Wat Visoun in Luang Prabang. 
A number of Buddha images have been lost or taken during the conflicts of the nineteenth and twentieth century. Some images which originated in the Kingdom of Lan Na were taken to Laos by King Setthathirath in the sixteenth century. These images were crafted for each of his daughters from solid gold, and include the Phra Sae Kham (housed at Wat Pho Chai in Nong Khai, Thailand), Phra Seum (housed at Wat Patum Wanaram, in Bangkok, Thailand), and the Phra Souk. These images were taken by the Thai armies in the nineteenth century to Isan and were ultimately bound for Bangkok. The Phra Souk or “Lucky Buddha,” sank in the Mekong during the storm which occurred when the 3 images were being moved by the Thais, the legend is depicted in murals at Wat Pho Chai. Other sets of royal Buddha images were lost during the era of French colonialism. Some were sold or taken as souvenirs, a number of royal images were lost in 1910 when the French gunboat the La Grandiere sank on the Mekong en route to a Paris exhibition.

Woodworking
Traditionally used in temples, some homes and government buildings have some carved elements. Carved furniture, elephant howdahs, river barges, and funerary carts can be found among the private collections of the elite or the Royal collections at the Palace Museum in Luang Prabang.
A European accounts of exploration to Laos in the sixteenth century described the bas reliefs which were found on the temples and palaces. Some examples of the craft are found along the temple frieze of Wat Mai, and the royal funerary chapel at Wat Xieng Thong in Luang Prabang.

Handicrafts
Laos produces a number of handicrafts which use bamboo and other forms of basketry. Traditionally Lao use woven bamboo mats in homes and temples. Basketry is traditionally seen in forms of domestic kitchen equipment, or in the house where bamboo thatching is used.  
Mulberry leaves which are not used for silk worm production are used for the production of saa paper.  Saa paper is a traditional art form which has been incorporated into a number of crafts for the tourist industry around Luang Prabang.

Music and performance arts
A form of lam is a battle-of-the-sexes between an expert male and expert female singer to entertain the audience and trip the opposing singer up using humor, innuendo or stylistic flair. Lam can be used in story telling as a sung form of folk poetry, and forms the oral tradition predating the national epics in literature. Lam used in animist traditions creates a type of chant which is used during ceremonies like the baci.

An instrument for music is the khaen a free-reed mouth organ made of bamboo. Laos uses a number of classical court instruments which show influence from China, Cambodia and Thailand. The ensembles include flutes, zithers, gongs, drums, fiddles, lutes, cymbals and xylophones. Mor lam includes electric guitars, synthesizers and electric keyboards.

Theater
Court music and performances known as khon and lakhon originated from the Khmer court and spread throughout the region, beginning in Laos during the Lan Xang era. Performances included jataka tales.
The nineteenth century spurred the creation of lam luang or Lao opera. Lam luang is a more theatrical version of lam music complete with sets, costumes and orchestral accompaniment. In 1972 the Pathet Lao formed the Central Lao Opera, a professional lam luang troupe. The performances center on social issues, traditional themes, and propaganda.

Dance
A folk dance in Laos is the lam vong. The lam vong begins with an individual using head and hand movements based on Buddhist mudras, who is then joined by a partner, and then by other couples until a crowd forms with 3 interconnected and turning circles.
In the 1980s some of the royal court dancers from Luang Prabang fled the Pathet Lao government to relocate in Nashville, Tennessee. Other performance dances include the "fon dhab" or “sword dance” which is a dance display of men's martial arts. 
The Hmong perform the "fon bun kin chieng" or Hmong “New Year dance;” the Khmu have a courtship dance known as the "fon pao bang"; the Red and Black Tai have a bamboo cane dance, and the Yao are known for bell and drum dances.

Clothing
Among men, the Lao traditionally wear a Khmer style billowed trouser or sampot, a Mandarin collar jacket or Indochinese shirt, and a pha biang or checkered shawl. For women, the traditional dress is a skirt with a embroidered foot called a sinh, a matching pha biang or shawl (longer shawls called hom are worn in colder areas), and is worn with a French inspired blouse. Men and women wear religious amulets, and amounts of gold and silver jewelry which is believed to ward off evil. 
Among Lao Theung, cotton materials are used. Khmu women are known for cotton sarongs with horizontal stripes, and black blouses. Among Katu and Alak there is a tradition of adding amounts of beadwork and silver coins. 
Lao Sung groups including the Hmong, Yao and Akha are known for embroidery, silver ornamentation, and color based patterns. For example, Blue Hmong women wear pleated skirts with bands of red, white, and blue embroidery; and a black jacket with orange and yellow embroidery. Yao women by contrast wear a black jacket with red lapels, pants, and embroidered black turbans.

Cuisine
A Lao meal may consist of a spiced minced fish or chicken salad or larb, served with sticky rice; a jaew or paste made of chili peppers for dipping; tam mak hung a fresh green papaya salad, a broth based soup like kaeng no mai (bamboo soup); fresh herbs and vegetables served raw; tropical fruit as a dessert; and is served with the local beer or lao-lao rice liquor.
Some Lao dishes have been adopted by Thais through the migration of Lao people throughout their country. Lao cooking uses mak phaet (chilies), pa daek or fermented fresh water fish sauce, kaffir lime leaves, and galangal in greater amounts to add bolder flavors to most dishes.
For non-sticky rice based dishes, a fork and spoon can be used. Chopsticks can used for noodle dishes like khao poon and khao soi. 
The years of French colonialism have given Laos a number of food items including the baguette or khao jii, omelets, pâté and croissants. The French introduced coffee cultivation.

References
External links

Events & Festivals in Laos (Department of Tourism Marketing of Ministry of Information, Culture and Tourism)

## Cuisine of Laos
Lao cuisine or Laotian cuisine (Lao: ອາຫານລາວ, pronounced [ʔàː.hǎːn láːw], RTGS: ahan lao) is the national cuisine of Laos.
The staple food of the Lao is sticky rice (Lao: ເຂົ້າໜຽວ, khao niao, [kʰȁw nǐaw]). Laos has the highest sticky rice consumption per capita in the world with an average of 171 kilograms (377 lb) of sticky rice consumed annually per person. Sticky rice is deeply ingrained in the culture, religious tradition, and national identity of Laos. It is a common belief within the Lao community that no matter where they are in the world, sticky rice will always be the glue that holds the Lao communities together, connecting them to their culture and to Laos. Affinity for sticky rice is considered the essence of what it means to be Lao. Often the Lao will refer to themselves as luk khao niao (Lao: ລູກເຂົ້າໜຽວ, [lùːk kʰȁw nǐaw]), which can be translated as 'children or descendants of sticky rice'.
The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) has described Laos as a "collector's paradise". Laos has the highest degrees of biodiversity of sticky rice in the world. As of 2013, approximately 6,530 glutinous rice varieties were collected from five continents (Asia, South America, North America, Europe and Africa) where glutinous rice are grown for preservation at the International Rice Genebank (IRGC). The IRRI gathered more than 13,500 samples and 3,200 varieties of glutinous rice from Laos.
The trifecta of Laos' national cuisine are sticky rice, laab, and green papaya salad (Lao: ຕຳໝາກຫຸ່ງ, tam mak hung). The most famous Lao dish is laab (Lao: ລາບ, [lâːp]; sometimes also spelled larb, larp or laap), a spicy mixture of marinated meat or fish that is sometimes raw (prepared like ceviche) with a variable combination of herbs, greens, and spices.
Lao cuisine has many regional variations, corresponding in part to the fresh foods local to each region. A French legacy is still evident in the capital city, Vientiane, where baguettes (Lao: ເຂົ້າຈີ່, [kʰȁw tɕīː]) are sold on the street and French restaurants are common and popular, which were first introduced when Laos was a part of French Indochina.

Origins of the Lao cuisine
The Lao originally came from a northern region that is now part of China. As they moved south they brought their traditions with them. Due to historical Lao migrations from Laos into neighboring regions, Lao cuisine has influenced the mainly Lao-populated region of Northeastern Thailand, and Lao foods were also introduced to Cambodia and  Northern Thailand where the Lao have migrated.

Like most Southeast Asian nations, Laos has been heavily influenced by Indian and Chinese culture. From time immemorial, Lao people traded directly with ancient China. It was the Indianization of Laos, however, that has had the most impact. The spread of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam into Southeast Asia during this period took with it Indian traditions and culture to what are now Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Burma, Cambodia and Laos where it took roots and continues to flourish to this day. It is also during this time that Buddhist monks introduced traditional Indian spices, curry, and coconut milk to Laos. However, unlike most of its neighbours, Lao people's affinity for glutinous or sticky rice and Lao cuisine's heavy focus on sticky rice meant that coconut milk and noodles never played a significant role in Lao cuisine. Instead, coconut milk, curry and noodles are limited to a few Laotian soups, noodle dishes and sticky rice-based desserts. 
With the Columbian exchange, non-native crops—such as tomato, papaya, sweetcorn, pineapple, and chili peppers—were introduced to Southeast Asia probably through the various sea ports of modern-day Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam via the Philippines and Malacca. Through trades with the Portuguese and other Europeans, acceptance and cultivation of non-native crops and ingredients quickly spread throughout Southeast Asia.
By the mid-1500s, Europeans were exploring and trading with mainland Southeast Asia, reaching as far as Vientiane and Luang Prabang. Some of the more notable Europeans who had travelled there or wrote extensively about their experiences were Fernão Mendes Pinto (1542-1545), Diogo Veloso and Blas Ruiz (1596), Geebard van Wusthof (1641), Giovanni Filippo de Marini (1642-1648), Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix (1830), and Henri Mouhot (1861).
Simon de la Loubère (1642-1729) observed that the cultivation of the papaya was already widespread in Siam around the early-1700s and by the time Pallegoix arrived as missionary to Bangkok, the papaya and chili peppers was already fully integrated in the Lao territory, dependencies and the Southeast Asian food culture as a whole.
French explorer Mouhot, during his trip to Luang Prabang, noted that the Laotians adored chili peppers.

Lao and Thai cuisine
In his book Culture and Customs of Laos, Arne Kislenko noted:

Any discussion about Lao cuisine cannot be limited to Laos. There are approximately six times more ethnic Lao in the Isan region of northeastern Thailand than in Laos itself, which makes it necessary to go beyond national boundaries in search of definitively Lao food. In fact, with the recent droves of migrants from Isan further south to Bangkok, the Thai capital has in many respects become the epicenter of Lao cuisine. Some estimate that more Lao are there than in any other city in the world, including Vientiane. There are also sizable expatriate communities in places like the United States and France that make for numerous culinary variations abroad.
According to the cultural anthropologist Penny Van Esterik, during the 1950s and 1960s, Lao food was little known by the central Thais and could be found only where there were gatherings of Lao or northeasterners: 

In the 1950s and 1960s glutinous rice, roast chicken, laab, somtam (papaya salad), and other Lao favorites were available in Bangkok only around the boxing stadium where northeastern boxers and fans gathered to eat and drink before and after boxing matches. Lao food could also be found outside construction sites in mobile food carts providing construction workers from the northeast with their regional foods and beside gas stations serving long-distance bus drivers.
At the conclusion of the Vietnam War, between 1975 and 1995, it was estimated that approximately 200,000 Lao refugees crossed the Mekong River into Thailand. Most stayed in the refugee camps while others moved to Bangkok looking for work.
The opening of the Mittraphap Road and the northeastern railway connecting central Thailand to its northern provinces created a gateway for one of Thailand's biggest inter-regional migrations during the economic boom of the 1980s, as demand for labour increased. It was estimated that between 1980 and 1990, about 1.1 million northeasterners moved from the northeast to central Thailand and Bangkok. This, in turn, helped popularize and create an unprecedented demand for Lao food outside of Laos and the northeast.
Van Esterik also noted that, "[i]n attempting to include northeastern food in a standardized national cuisine, middle-class Bangkok selected and modified the taste of a few dishes—grilled chicken, somtam, laab—by reducing the chili peppers and increasing the sugar, and ignored other dishes such as fermented fish and insects". According to Professor Sirijit Sunanta, these dishes were then represented as Thai food when presented to the world.
Although more ethnic Lao live in Thailand than in Laos and Lao cuisine is key to popularising Thai food abroad, the word "Lao" is hardly mentioned. This is perhaps due to forced Thaification, an official attempt to promote national unity and "Thainess", in which any mention of "Lao" and other non-Thai descriptors were removed and replaced with "northeastern Thai" or "Isan".
Consequently, Thaification has led to social discrimination against northeasterners, and the word "Lao" became a derogatory term. Being "Lao" was stigmatized as being uneducated and backward, causing many northeasterners to be ashamed to be known as Lao. However, there is a sense of resurgence and pride in Lao identity as it loses its stigma, particularly among the Isan youth.
In the West, even with sizable expatriate communities, Lao cuisine is still virtually unknown, even though much of what is served in Thai restaurants is likely to be Lao or Lao-owned. Unbeknownst to most people, when they eat their favourite som tam, larb, and sticky rice at their favourite Thai or northeastern Thai (Isan) restaurants they are actually eating the Thai versions of traditional Lao food. This accidental reinforcement of Thaification by expatriate Lao communities and Lao restaurateurs is observed by Malaphone Phommasa and Celestine Detvongsa in their article "Lao American Ethnic Economy":

Unlike […] ethnic specific stores, Lao-owned restaurants are doing better in reaching out to the general public. Although there are some restaurants that advertised as singularly "Laotian", many Lao restaurants are established under the guise of Thai restaurants and Thai/Lao restaurants to entice mainstream customers. Because most Americans are unfamiliar with Laotian food, Lao entrepreneurs have aimed to acquire more business by advertising themselves as Thai restaurants: the latter have successfully achieved popularity with the mainstream population. These restaurateurs would then incorporate Lao dishes onto the menu. Although there are many similarities between Lao and northern Thai cuisine, certain foods will distinguish a true Thai restaurant from a Lao-owned restaurant would be the inclusion of "sticky rice" on the menu... One of the earliest Thai restaurants to open in North America was by Keo Sananikone, a Lao refugee and early pioneer of Thai food in the US. In 1977, Keo opened a series of Thai restaurants starting with Mekong, Keo's, and Mekong II in Hawaii, which became a hot spot for the Hollywood crowd. Keo later wrote an internationally best-selling Thai cookbook, Keo's Thai Cuisine, in 1985. Keo explains the reason for opening Thai as opposed to Lao restaurants: "I felt that Laotian food would not have been successful in America at that time. Laotian food is very basic and simple, and Thai food is very exotic and colourful."

Ingredients
Rice and noodles
Rice  (Lao: ເຂົ້າ; Lao pronunciation: [kʰa᷆w])
Glutinous rice – (Lao: ເຂົ້າໜຽວ; Lao pronunciation: [kʰa᷆w.nǐaw]), a type of rice which has opaque grains and very low amylose content, and is especially sticky when cooked.
Cellophane noodles – (Lao: ເສັ້ນລ້ອນ; Lao pronunciation: [se᷆n.lɔ̂ːn]), transparent noodles made from mung bean starch and water.
Khao poon – (Lao: ເສັ້ນເຂົ້າປຸ້ນ; Lao pronunciation: [se᷆n.kʰa᷆w.pûn]), fresh rice noodles which are made from rice which has first been fermented for three days, boiled, and then made into noodles by pressing the resulting dough through a sieve into boiling water.
Rice noodles – (Lao: ເສັ້ນເຝີ; Lao pronunciation: [se᷆n.fɤ̌ː]), noodles that are made from rice. This should not be confused with Vietnamese pho. Though the word has Vietnamese origin, the dish it refers to in Laos might not be the same as Vietnamese pho.

Vegetables, herbs and spices
Asian basil – (Lao: ບົວລະພາ, Isan: บัวระพา, Lao pronunciation: [bùa.la.pʰáː]), eaten raw with feu.
Bamboo shoots – (Lao: ໜໍ່ໄມ່, Isan: หน่อไม้, Lao pronunciation: [nɔ̄ː.mâj]), used in stews or boiled as a side dish.
Banana flower – (Lao: ໝາກປີ, Isan: หมากปี, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.pìː]), a raw accompaniment to noodle soup or cooked in others.
Chili pepper – (Lao: ໝາກເຜັດ; Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.pʰét], Isan: พริก, Lao pronunciation: [pʰīk]), seven popular types.
Climbing wattle (acacia) – (Lao: ຜັກຂາ, Isan: ผักขา, Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.kʰǎː]), used in soups, curries, omelettes, and stir-fries.
Coriander (cilantro) – (Lao: ຜັກຫອມປ້ອມ; Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.hɔ̌ːm.pɔ̂ːm], Isan: ผักซี, Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.sīː]), both leaves and seeds added to dips, marinades, and a wide variety of dishes.
Cucumber – (Lao: ໝາກແຕງ, Isan: หมากแตง, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.tɛ̀ːŋ]), eaten as a garnish or as a substitute for green papaya in salad.
Galangal – (Lao: ຂ່າ, Isan: ข่า, pronounced [kʰāː]), typically used in soups, mixed dishes, and marinades.
Garlic – (Lao: ກະທຽມ, Isan: กระเทียม, Lao pronunciation: [ka.tʰíam])
Ginger flower and root – (Lao: ຂີງ, Isan: ขิง, Lao pronunciation: [kʰǐŋ])
Kaffir lime – (Lao: ໝາກຂີ້ຫູດ; pronounced [ma᷆ːk.kʰi᷆ː.hu᷆ːt], Isan: มะกรูด maak-khii-huut), typically used in soups and stews.
Kaipen – (Lao: ໄຄແຜ່ນ, Isan: ไกแผ่น, Lao pronunciation: [kʰáj.pʰɛ̄n]), dried sheets of edible Mekong River algae, similar to nori.
Lao basil – (Lao: ຜັກອີ່ຕູ່; Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.ʔīː.tūː]), Isan: แมงลัก used in soups and stews.
Lao coriander – ("Lao dill"), used in stews and eaten raw.
Lao eggplant – (Lao: ໝາກເຂືອ, Isan: หมากเขือ; Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.kʰɯ̌a]), small and round Kermit eggplant, used in stews or eaten raw.
Lemongrass – (Lao: ຫົວສິງໄຄ, Isan: หัวสิงไค;; pronounced [hǔa.sǐŋ.kʰáj], hua sing-khai), used in soups, stews and marinades.
Lime – (Lao: ໝາກນາວ, Isan: หมากนาว, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.náːw]), common ingredient to many dishes.
Mint – (Lao: ໃບຫອມລາບ; Lao pronunciation: [bàj.hɔ̌ːm.lâːp], Isan: ใบสะระแหน่, Lao pronunciation: [bàj.sa.la.nɛ̄ː]), used in goy/laap, and eaten raw.
Midnight horror – (Lao: ໝາກລີ້ນໄມ້, Isan: หมากลิ้นไม้,; Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.lîːn.mâj]), a bitter green, eaten raw.
Mushrooms – (Lao: ເຫັດ, Isan: เห็ด, Lao pronunciation: [hét]), used in soups and stir-fries.
Neem – (Lao: ຜັກກະເດົາ, Isan: ผักกะเดา, Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.ka.dàw], kadao), a bitter vegetable often eaten raw.
Papaya (green) – (Lao: ໝາກຫຸ່ງ, Isan: มักหุ่ง, pronounced [ma᷆ːk.hūŋ]), shredded and used in spicy papaya salad.
Rattan shoots – typically used in stews (bitter).
Scarlet wisteria – (Lao: ດອກແຄ, Isan: ดอกแค, Lao pronunciation: [dɔ᷆ːk.kʰɛ́ː]), a blossom used in soups and curries.
Sakhaan – (Lao: ສະຄ້ານ, Isan: สะค้าน; Lao pronunciation: [sa.kʰâːn]), stem of Piper ribesioides, used in stews.
Shallot – (Lao: ບົ່ວແດງ, Isan: บั่วแดง; Lao pronunciation: [būa.dɛ̀ːŋ])
Tamarind – (Lao: ໝາກຂາມ, Isan: หมากขาม, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.kʰǎːm]), sour fruit used in soups or as a snack.
Tamarind leaf – (Lao: ໃບໝາກຂາມ, Isan: ใบหมากขาม, Lao pronunciation: [bàj.ma᷆ːk.kʰǎːm]), used in soups.
Tomato – (Lao: ໝາກເລັ່ນ, Isan: หมากเล่น, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.lēn]), used as a garnish or in papaya salad.
Turkey berry – (Lao: ໝາກແຄ້ງ, Isan: หมากแค้ง, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.kʰɛ̂ːŋ]), used in stews and curries.

Water spinach – (Lao: ຜັກບົ້ງ, Isan: ผักบุ้ง, Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.bûŋ]), stir-fried, steamed, or eaten raw as an accompaniment.
Wild betel leaves – (Lao: ຜັກອີ່ເລີດ, Isan: ผักอีเลิด, Lao pronunciation: [pʰák.ʔīː.lɤ̂ːt]), eaten raw.
Yanang leaf – (Lao: ໃບຢານາງ, Isan: ใบย่านาง, Lao pronunciation: [bàj.jāː.náːŋ]), used as a green colouring agent and as a seasoning or thickener for soups and stews.
Yardlong beans – (Lao: ໝາກຖົ່ວ, Isan: หมากถั่ว, Lao pronunciation: [ma᷆ːk.tʰūa]), eaten raw, in stews, and can be made into a spicy bean salad (tam mak thoua).

Pastes and sauces
Fish sauce (nam pa) – clear fish sauce (Lao: ນ້ຳປາ, Isan: น้ำปลา, Lao pronunciation: [nâm.pàː]), used as a general condiment.
Padaek – (Lao: ປາແດກ, Isan: ปลาแดก, Lao pronunciation: [pàː.dɛ᷆ːk]), Lao-style fish paste.
Soy sauce

Meat
Century egg (khai niaow ma; lit. 'horse urine egg') – (Lao: ໄຂ່ຢ່ຽວມ້າ, Isan: ไข่เยี่ยวม้า; Lao pronunciation: [kʰāj jiāw mâː])
Pig blood curd
Pork belly "three-layer pork" – (Lao: ຊີ້ນໝູສາມຊັ້ນ, Isan: ซี้นหมูสามซั้น; Lao pronunciation: [sîːn.mǔː.sǎːm.sân])
Dried water buffalo skin – (Lao: ໜັງເຄັມ; Lao pronunciation: [nǎŋ.kʰém]) used in jaew bong and stews.

Fish
Although Laos is landlocked, different types of fish are consumed, especially freshwater ones. 
Notable Lao fish dishes include:

Larb fish
Mok pa: steamed fish, typically wrapped in banana leaves and tied with bamboo string. It is made with lemongrass, kaffir leaves, green onions, fish sauce, green chiles, shrimp paste, and fresh dill.
Raw shrimp: freshly squeezed lemon juice, spices, and fish sauce

Insects
Fruits
Fruits in Laos include watermelon, pineapple, sugar apple, (custard apple or sweetsop), longan, litchi, Asian pear, mango, rose apple (water apple), banana, jackfruit, rambutan, young coconut, orange, sweet tamarind, papaya, durian, sugarcane, pomelo, sapodilla, guava, star apple, mangosteen, melon, santol, langsat, grapes, corossolier (soursop), mak yom, and mak num nom.

Kitchen utensils
The typical Lao stove, or brazier, is called a tao-lo and is fueled by charcoal. It is shaped like a bucket, with room for a single pot or pan to sit on top.  The wok, maw khang in Lao, is used for frying and stir-frying.  Sticky rice is steamed inside of a bamboo basket, a huad, which sits on top of a pot, which is called the maw nung.
A large, deep mortar called a khok is used for pounding tam mak hoong and other foods.  It is indispensable in the Lao kitchen.

Cooking methods
Grilling, boiling, stewing, steaming, searing and mixing (as in salads) are all traditional cooking methods. Stir-frying is common, and considered to be a Chinese influence. Stews are often green in color, because of the large proportion of vegetables used as well as ya nang leaf.  
Ping means grilled. Ping gai is grilled chicken, ping sin is grilled meat, and ping pa is grilled fish. Before grilling, the meat may be seasoned with minced garlic, minced coriander root, minced galangal, salt, soy sauce, and fish sauce.
Ways Lao food differs from neighboring cuisines include that Lao meals commonly include a large quantity of fresh raw greens, vegetables and herbs served undressed on the side, and that savory dishes are never sweet, and some dishes are bitter.

Eating customs
The traditional manner of eating was communal, with diners sitting on a reed mat on the wooden floor around a raised platform woven out of rattan called a ka toke. Dishes are arranged on the ka toke, which is of a standard size.  Where there are many diners, multiple ka tokes will be prepared. Each ka toke will have one or more baskets of sticky rice, which is shared by all the diners at the ka toke.
In recent times, eating at a ka toke is the exception rather than the rule. The custom is maintained, however, at temples, where each monk is served his meal on a ka toke. Once food is placed on the ka toke it becomes a pha kao. In modern homes, the term for preparing the table for a meal is still taeng pha kao, or prepare the phah kao.
Traditionally, spoons were used only for soups and white rice, and chopsticks (ໄມ້ທູ່,mai thu) were used only for noodles. Most food was handled by hand. The reason this custom evolved is probably due to the fact that sticky rice can only be easily handled by hand.
Lao meals typically consist of a soup dish, a grilled dish, a sauce, greens, and a stew or mixed dish (koy or laap). The greens are usually fresh raw greens, herbs and other vegetables, though depending on the dish they accompany, they could also be steamed or more typically, parboiled.  Dishes are not eaten in sequence; the soup is sipped throughout the meal.  Beverages, including water, are not typically a part of the meal. When guests are present, the meal is always a feast, with food made in quantities sufficient for twice the number of diners. For a host, not having enough food for guests would be humiliating.
The custom is to close the rice basket when one is finished eating.

Dishes
Dips
Jaew (Lao: ແຈ່ວ) is a popular type of dipping sauce in Laos.

Jaew mak khua – made from roasted eggplant.
Jaew mak len – made from roasted sweet tomatoes.
Jaew bong – sweet and spicy paste made with roasted chilies, pork skin, galangal and other ingredients.
Jaew padaek – made from fried padaek, fish, roast garlic, chilies, lemon grass, and other ingredients.

Appetizers
Kap kaem (Lao: ກັບແກ້ມ) are dishes served as snacks, before the main dish, or with beer.

Kaipen – fried snack made of fresh water algae, usually served with jaew bong.
Khai khuam – stuffed eggs "upside down".
Khai nug – steamed, boiled egg made by making a hole in the egg to remove the contents and pouring it back in after mixing the yolk with other ingredients.
Khua pak bong – stir-fried water spinach.
Look seen – Laotian beef meatballs.
Mekong river moss – fried moss from the Mekong River.
Miang
Sai kok – chunky pork sausage.
Sai oua – grilled pork sausage.
Seen hang – Laotian beef jerky that is flash-fried beef.
Seen savanh – thinly sliced beef jerky with sweeter taste and covered with sesame seeds.
Seen tork
Som khai pa – pickled fish roe.
Som moo – pickled pork with pork skin (summer sausages).
Som pa – pickled fish.
Som phak kad – pickled greens.
Som phak kai lum who moo – pickled cabbage with pickled pork ears.
Yaw – Laotian pork roll. Known as giò lụa in Vietnam.
Yaw dip – a type of spring roll made with rice paper, vermicelli, lettuce, and various fillings including shrimp. It is usually eaten with peanut sauce or Laotian sweet sauce. Known as gỏi cuốn in Vietnam.
Yaw jeun – fried spring roll.

Salads
Sarad (Lao: ສະຫຼັດ) is a general name to describe a dish with mixed vegetables, herbs, and spices. Meat salads in Laos are known as larb or laap.

Larb – a spicy Lao minced meat salad made with fermented fish and herbs. Various meats include fish, duck, chicken, pork, and beef, as well as mushrooms.
Nam tok – a meat-based salad similar to larb. It can also be made into a stew.
Pon – spicy puree of cooked fish.
Tam som – an overall term for the following salads made with Lao chili peppers, lime juice, tomatoes, fish sauce/paste, and sugar. Crab paste and shrimp paste are optional.
Tam khao poon – spicy vermicelli noodles salad.
Tam mak guh – spicy plantain salad.
Tam mak hoong – spicy green papaya salad.
Tum mak khua – spicy eggplant salad.
Tam mak taeng – spicy cucumber salad.
Tam mak thua – spicy green/yardlong bean salad.

Soups and stews
Kaeng (Lao: ແກງ; lit. 'soup')

Ant egg soup – soup made with ant eggs.
Kaeng jeut – vegetable and pork soup.
Kaeng galee – Lao curry.
Keng no mai or soup naw mai – a green stew made with bamboo shoots.
Or – green vegetable stew.
Or lam – Luang Prabang-style green vegetable stew.
Tom jeaw pa – spicy fish soup.
Tom kha gai – a spicy and sour soup made with coconut milk, mushrooms, and chicken.
Tom padaek – fish stewed in padaek.
Tom yum – a spicy and sour soup made with lemongrass and various meats such as beef, chicken, pork, and shrimp or other seafood.

Grilled dishes
Ahan ping (Lao: ອາຫານປີ້ງ; lit. 'grilled food')

Ping gai – grilled, marinated chicken.
Ping hua ped – grilled, marinated duck head. It can be considered an appetizer.
Ping moo – grilled, marinated pork.
Ping pa – grilled fish mixed with spices and herbs.
Ping ped – grilled, marinated duck.
Ping seen – grilled, marinated beef.
Ping theen gai – grilled, marinated chicken feet.
Seen dat – Laotian-style barbecue. Traditional meats and vegetables are seared on a dome-shaped griddle.

Steamed dishes
Ahan neung (Lao: ອາຫານຫນື້ງ; lit. 'steamed food')

Mok pa – fish steamed in banana leaf.
Mok gai – chicken steamed in banana leaf.
Mok khai
Mok kai pa
Ua dok kae
Titi gai – steak in a banana leaf wrap.

Rice dishes
Ahan kap khao (Lao: ອາຫານກັບເຂົ້າ; lit. 'food with rice') are dishes made with rice as the main ingredient.

Khao khua or khao phat – Laotian-styled fried rice.
Khao niao – steamed glutinous rice, popularly known as "sticky rice". This type of rice is usually kept in a bamboo basket and is shared among all diners. Different ingredients such as coconut milk and red beans can be added to make the rice into a sweet dessert.
Khao piak khao (lit. 'rice wet rice') – rice porridge. Toppings may contain blood curds, century eggs, fried onions or garlic, and scallions.
Khao ping or khao jee – baked sticky rice seasoned with eggs. Khao chee is also another name for bread.
Khao jao or khao neung – steamed white rice. Jasmine rice is generally used. This type of rice is also used as an ingredient for many stir-fried dishes.
Nam khao – crispy rice salad made with deep-fried rice balls, chunks of fermented pork sausage called som moo, chopped peanuts, grated coconut, sliced scallions or shallots, mint, cilantro, lime juice, fish sauce, and other ingredients.

Noodles
Feu (Lao: ເຝີ) or mee (Lao: ໝີ່). Noodles are popular dishes in northern and central Laos. These can vary from "wet noodles" served with broth, or "dry noodles" which are typically stir-fried.

Feu – Laotian-styled pho, or rice noodle soup.
Kaeng sen lon – soup made with glass noodles and meatballs.
Khao piak sen – rice flour noodles in chicken broth. Similar to the Vietnamese dish bánh canh and the Japanese dish udon.
Khao poon – rice vermicelli soup, also known as "Lao laksa".
Khua mee – pan-fried rice noodles topped with thinly sliced egg omelette.
Lard na – stir-fried noodles covered in gravy.
Mee haeng – wheat noodles with vegetables and meat.
Mee ka tee – rice vermicelli made in coconut milk.
Mee nam – wheat noodles in a broth of vegetables and meat.
Pad Lao – stir-fried noodles mixed with lightly scrambled egg. Similar to pad thai.
Pad ki mao – stir-fried broad rice noodles.
Pad sen lon – stir-fried glass noodles.
Suki – Laotian-styled sukiyaki.
Yum sen lon – tangy salad made with glass noodles.

Breads
Bread is originally a French import, but very popular.  The most common form is small baguettes, known as (Lao: ເຂົ້າຈີ່, romanized: khao chi).

Khao jee pâté (Lao: ເຂົ້າຈີ່ປາເຕ້) – baguette stuffed with pâté and condiments, the Lao version of bánh mì.

Desserts
Khong van (Lao: ຂອງຫວານ; lit. 'sweet things'). Lao desserts are generally made with the combination of tropical fruits and glutinous rice products. These can vary from types of cakes, to jelly, to drinks, and custards.

Khao lam – a sweet sticky rice dish made with red beans, coconut, coconut milk, and sugar prepared in bamboo.
Khao niao mak muang – sticky rice with coconut and mango.
Khao pard – jelly-like rice cake, unique for its layers. It is usually green from the use of pandan leaves as an ingredient.
Khao tom – steamed rice wrapped in banana leaf. Various fillings include pork, bananas, and taro.
Khanom kok – coconut dumpling made on a griddle. It may be topped with green onions.
Khanom maw kaeng – coconut custard cake.
Khanom nab (Lao: ເຂົ້າຫນົມແຫນບ) – rice dumpling stuff with sweet coconut.
Lod xong – a green, worm-like dessert made with rice jelly, coconut milk, and liquefied palm sugar.
Nam van – a general name for a dessert which can contain tapioca and various fruits including durian, jack fruit, and water chestnuts.
Sangkaya – custard made with kabocha, a type of Asian squash.
Voon – jelly made with coconut milk.

Drinks
Lao coffee is often called Pakxong coffee (cafe pakxong in Lao), which is grown on the Bolovens Plateau around the town of Pakxong. This area is sometimes said to be the best place in Southeast Asia for coffee cultivation. Both robusta and Arabica are grown in Laos. Most of the Arabica in Laos is consumed locally and most of the Robusta is exported to Thailand, where it goes into Nescafé. The custom in Laos is to drink coffee in glasses, with condensed milk in the bottom, followed by a chaser of green tea.  The highly regarded tea is also grown on the Bolovens Plateau.
There are two general types of traditional alcoholic beverages, both produced from rice: lao hai and lao lao. Lao hai means jar alcohol and is served from an earthen jar. It is communally and competitively drunk through straws at festive occasions. It can be likened to sake in appearance and flavor. Lao lao or Lao alcohol is more like a whiskey. It is also called lao khao or, in English, white alcohol.  However, there is also a popular variant of lao lao made from purple rice, which has a pinkish hue.
The Lao state-owned brewery's Beerlao has become very popular in Laos. The Bangkok Post has described it as the Dom Pérignon of Asian beers. In 2004, Time magazine described it as Asia's best beer. In June 2005, it beat 40 other brews to take the silver prize at Russia's Osiris Beer Festival, which it had entered for the first time.

Non-alcoholic
Ca fay – Lao coffee.
Nam oi – sugarcane juice.
Nam pun – Smoothie
Nam mak pow – coconut juice; with or without coconut meat.
Oliang – iced coffee; black or with condensed milk.
Saa – Laotian tea.

Alcoholic
Beerlao
Lao-khao – Lao rice wine.
Lao lao – Lao whiskey.
Lao-hai – Lao rice wine made with glutinous rice.

See also
Hmong cuisine
Phia Sing

References
Further reading
Davidson, Alan (1975). Fish and Fish Dishes of Laos. Rutland, Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle Co. ISBN 0-907325-95-5.
Du Pont De Bie, Natacha (2004). Ant Egg Soup: The Adventures of a Food Tourist in Laos. London: Sceptre. ISBN 0-340-82567-7.
Sing, Phia. Alan Davidson and Jennifer Davidson, eds. (1981) Traditional Recipes of Laos: Being the Manuscript Recipe Books of the Late Phia Sing, from the Royal Palace at Luang Prabang, Reproduced in Facsimile and Furnished With an English Translation. London: Prospect Books. ISBN 0-907325-02-5.
Culloty, Dorothy (2010). Food from Northern Laos – The Boat Landing Cookbook. Te Awamutu, New Zealand: Galangal Press ISBN 978-0-473-17236-7
Xaixana Champanakone (2010). Lao Cooking and The Essence of Life. Vientiane Publishing ISBN 978-9932-00-061-6

External links

Article on Lao food in The New York Times
Excerpts from Traditional Recipes of Laos

## List of museums in Laos
This is a list of museums in Laos.

Champasak Provincial Museum
Haw Phra Kaew
Kaysone Phomvihane Museum
Lao National Museum
Luang Namtha Museum
Royal Palace, Luang Prabang

See also

List of museums