--- METADATA ---
SOURCE_URL: Wikipedia & Web Search for Algeria
FILE_NAME: country_algeria.txt
PROCESSED_DATE: 2026-07-22 15:43:40
----------------

# Algeria

## General Overview
Algeria, officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. Spanning over 2,381,741 square kilometres (919,595 sq mi), it is the largest country in Africa and the tenth largest in the world. It is bordered to the northeast by Tunisia; to the east by Libya; to the southeast by Niger; to the southwest by Mali, Mauritania, and Western Sahara; to the west by Morocco; and to the north by the Mediterranean Sea. With a population of over 47 million, Algeria is the tenth-most populous country in Africa. Its capital and largest city is Algiers.
Algeria's territory has been a crossroads of cultures and civilizations for millennia, shaped first by indigenous Amazigh societies, including the Numidians, whose kingdom became one of the earliest major states in the region, as well as by Phoenician, Roman, Vandal, and Byzantine influences. From the 7th century onward, the spread of Islam and the arrival of Arab tribes gradually transformed the region's linguistic, religious, and cultural landscape, contributing to the development of a distinct Algerian identity rooted in both Arab-Islamic and Amazigh heritage. Between the 8th and 15th centuries, Algeria was ruled by a succession of local Islamic dynasties including Rustamids, Fatimids, Zirids, Hammadids, Almohads and Zayyanids . In 1516, the Regency of Algiers was established, gradually emerging as a largely autonomous state owing nominal allegiance to the Ottoman Empire. After nearly three centuries as a major power in the Mediterranean, the country was invaded by France in 1830 and formally annexed in 1848, though it was not fully conquered and pacified until 1903. French rule brought mass European settlement that displaced the local population; by mid-1870, indigenous Algerians declined by up to a third due to warfare, disease, and starvation. French colonization faced continuous Algerian resistance, from Emir Abdelkader's campaigns and the Mokrani Revolt to the rise of nationalist movements in the 20th century. The Sétif and Guelma massacre in 1945 catalysed local resistance that culminated in the outbreak of the Algerian War in 1954. Algeria gained independence in 1962. It descended into a bloody civil war from 1992 to 2002, remaining in an official state of emergency until the 2010–2012 Algerian protests during the Arab Spring.
Algeria has a semi-arid climate, with the Sahara desert dominating most of the territory except for its fertile and mountainous north, where most of the population is concentrated. Its official languages are Arabic and Tamazight, while the vast majority of the population speak the Algerian dialect of Arabic. The usage of French persists, especially in media, education, and certain administrative matters, but has no official status. Most Algerians identify as Arabs, while Berbers form a sizeable minority. Sunni Islam is the official religion and practiced by 99% of the population. 
Algeria is a semi-presidential republic composed of 69 provinces (wilayas) and 1,541 communes. It is a regional power in North Africa and a middle power in global affairs, with the largest military budget in Africa. As of 2025, Algeria has the highest Human Development Index in continental Africa, and the third largest economy in Africa, due mostly to its large petroleum and natural gas reserves, which are the sixteenth and ninth largest in the world, respectively. Sonatrach, the national oil company, is the largest company in Africa and a major supplier of natural gas to Europe. Algeria is a member of the African Union, the Arab League, the OIC, OPEC, the United Nations, and the Arab Maghreb Union, of which it is a founding member.

Name
Different forms of the name Algeria include: Arabic: الجزائر, romanised: al-Jazāʾir, Algerian Arabic: دزاير, romanised: dzāyer, French: l'Algérie. The country's full name is officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (Arabic: الجمهورية الجزائرية الديمقراطية الشعبية, romanised: al-Jumhūriyah al-Jazāʾiriyah ad-Dīmuqrāṭiyah ash‑Shaʿbiyah; French: République algérienne démocratique et populaire, abbr. RADP; Standard Algerian Berber: Tagduda tazzayrit tamagdayt taɣerfant, ⵜⴰⴳⴷⵓⴷⴰ ⵜⴰⵣⵣⴰⵢⵔⵉⵜ ⵜⴰⵎⴰⴳⴷⴰⵢⵜ ⵜⴰⵖⴻⵔⴼⴰⵏⵜ).

Etymology
The name Algeria ultimately derives from the city of Algiers, whose Arabic name, al-Jazāʾir (الجزائر, meaning "the islands"), referred to the small islands once located off the city's coast. The term itself was a shortened form of Jazāʾir Banī Mazghanna (جزائر بني مزغنة, "the islands of the Bani Mazghanna"), named after a local Berber tribe. The city was founded in 950 by the Sanhaja Berber Emir Buluggin ibn Ziri on the site of the ancient city of Icosium, and its name later appeared in the writings of medieval Muslim geographers such as Al-Bakri.
The modern state took its name from the Regency of Algiers, the Ottoman polity established in the central Maghreb during the early 16th century. Under Ottoman rule, a political and administrative structure gradually emerged that helped define the territory and borders of what would become Algeria. Contemporary sources referred to the land as Watan al-Jazāʾir (وطن الجزائر, "the country of Algiers"), while the Ottoman Turkish aristocracy settled in the region identified both itself and the local population as "Algerians."

History
Prehistory and ancient history
Around ~1.8-million-year-old stone artifacts from Ain Hanech (Algeria) were considered to represent the oldest archaeological materials in North Africa. Stone artifacts and cut-marked bones that were excavated from two nearby deposits at Ain Boucherit are estimated to be ~1.9 million years old, and even older stone artifacts to be as old as ~2.4 million years. Hence, the Ain Boucherit evidence shows that ancestral hominins inhabited the Mediterranean fringe in northern Africa much earlier than previously thought. The evidence strongly argues for early dispersal of stone tool manufacture and use from East Africa, or a possible multiple-origin scenario of stone technology in both East and North Africa.
Neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the Levalloisian and Mousterian styles (43,000 BC) similar to those in the Levant. Algeria was the site of the highest state of development of Middle Paleolithic Flake tool techniques. Tools of this era, starting about 30,000 BC, are called Aterian (after the archaeological site of Bir el Ater, south of Tebessa).
The earliest blade industries in North Africa are called Iberomaurusian (located mainly in the Oran region). This industry appears to have spread throughout the coastal regions of the Maghreb between 15,000 and 10,000 BC. Neolithic civilisation (animal domestication and agriculture) developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean Maghreb perhaps as early as 11,000 BC or as late as between 6000 and 2000 BC. This life, richly depicted in the Tassili n'Ajjer paintings, predominated in Algeria until the classical period. The mixture of peoples of North Africa coalesced eventually into a distinct native population that came to be called Berbers, who are the indigenous peoples of northern Africa.

From their principal centre of power at Carthage, the Carthaginians expanded and established small settlements along the North African coast; by 600 BC, a Phoenician presence existed in the Algerian coast, such as Icosium in modern day Algiers and Hippo Regius (modern Annaba). These settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages. The Carthaginians avoided conquering the strong Berber tribes in the interior. Instead, they collected tribute, focused on trade (especially metals), and maintained friendly relations. The Berbers supplied them with goods, slaves, and skilled cavalry through trans-Saharan networks. Carthaginian culture strongly influenced nearby Berber tribes, who adopted many of its elements. From the sixth century BC, under the Magonid dynasty, Carthage became more aggressive, partly due to rivalry with the Greeks, leading to conflict in Sicily in 580 BC.

As Carthaginian power grew, its impact on the indigenous population increased dramatically. By the fifth century BC, Berbers in what is now Algeria had developed mixed farming and pastoral economies, advanced manufacturing, trade and political organisation supported several states. By the third century BC, two major Berber kingdoms existed: the Masaesyli (from the Moulouya River in eastern Morocco to the Rhummel in Algeria) and the Massyli (in extreme eastern Algeria and western Tunisia). In 203–202 BC, Masinissa of the Massyli, after being supported by Rome and playing a key role in the Battle of Zama against Carthaginian general Hannibal, defeated his western rivals (including Syphax) and unified the territories into the Kingdom of Numidia. Stretching from Tabarka in Tunisia to the Moulouya River, with its capital at Cirta (Constantine), Numidia represented a high point of Berber civilization. Masinissa promoted agriculture, built a strong army and navy, and was praised by ancient writers such as Roman historian Livy as an exceptional ruler. After Masinissa's death in 148 BC, succession struggles arose. His grandson Jugurtha (r. 118–106 BC) reunified Numidia through ruthless means but provoked Rome through conflict and the massacre of Roman citizens at Cirta. Despite brilliant resistance, Jugurtha was defeated and captured in 106 BC with the betrayal of his father-in-law Bocchus of Mauretania.Rome successfully built local alliances in North Africa, such as the one with Massinissa against Carthage. However, it gradually tightened control by first turning Numidia into a protectorate, then dividing and weakening it. Later Berber client kings, such as Juba I (who supported Pompey and was defeated by Caesar at Thapsus in 46 BC), continued to rule diminished territories. Augustus installed Juba II (r. 25 BC–c. 23 AD), a highly cultured scholar and husband of Cleopatra Selene, as client king of Mauretania (central Algeria and Morocco), bringing a period of prosperity. In 40 AD, Emperor Caligula executed Juba II's son Ptolemy. Following a subsequent Berber revolt, Rome abolished the last client kingdoms and imposed direct rule, dividing the territory into provinces (Mauretania Caesariensis, Mauretania Tingitana, and Africa Proconsularis).

Rome extensively integrated local elites: the Severan dynasty (192–235 AD) was of African origin, and Emperor Macrinus was born in Caesarea (modern Cherchell, Algeria) around 165 AD. He became Praetorian Prefect, assassinated Caracalla in 217, and ruled briefly for about 15 months. At its height, 90 out of 600 Roman senators came from North Africa. While Rome brought in settlers and established colonies of veterans, its presence primarily promoted the assimilation of local populations, who preserved their languages and many traditions while adapting them to Latin and Roman gods. The Romans helped create and develop cities that relied heavily on local contributions. Nevertheless, Roman rule had a largely negative long-term impact on Berber society. While coastal areas saw grand Roman construction, much of the interior was turned into grain-exporting latifundia, pushing Berbers into the hinterland where they retribalized and resisted for generations. Christianity spread in the 3rd–4th centuries. Its most prominent Berber figures were Saint Augustine, the bishop of Hippo Regius (modern-day Annaba, Algeria) and his mother, Saint Monica. However, Christianity rapidly declined among Berbers after being associated with Roman exploitation, especially following the suppression of the Donatist movement.

By the time the Vandals ended Roman control in 429 AD, most of Algeria had returned to Berber tribal rule. Under King Genseric, the Vandal Kingdom successfully defended Carthage against two Byzantine expeditions from Constantinople in 460 and 468. A peace treaty in 474 brought several decades of stability. This period ended when Gelimer deposed his cousin Hilderic and seized power. In 533, Emperor Justinian I, seeking to restore the Roman Empire, launched a major campaign against the Vandals. A large fleet commanded by General Belisarius sailed from Constantinople. After landing near Carthage, Belisarius decisively defeated the Vandals in two battles, occupied Carthage, and captured King Gelimer, who was exiled to Anatolia. Many Vandals were enslaved or expelled from North Africa. 
Byzantine rule in Africa was limited mainly to the provinces of Byzacena, Proconsular Africa, and Numidia. While some urban life persisted, rural areas suffered from heavy taxation, frequent revolts, and insecurity. The devastating Justinian Plague further weakened the region. The Byzantines then faced resistance from the Moorish tribes of the Aurès Mountains. Governor Solomon defeated them and reinforced control through an extensive fortification program, but he was killed in battle near Tebessa in 543. General John Troglita later restored a fragile peace, granting significant autonomy to the Moorish kingdoms. The most prominent of these were the Mauro-Roman and Altava Kingdoms. A growing sense of local autonomy emerged, exemplified by the powerful governor Gregory the Patrician (from 646), who minted his own coins and moved the capital to Sufetula (Sbeitla).

Middle Ages
The Muslim conquest of the Maghreb took place between 647 and 709, marking the Arab-Islamic expansion into North Africa, which was then divided between Byzantine-controlled coastal territories and independent Berber kingdoms and tribes in the interior. The conquest unfolded in three main phases and ultimately brought most of the region under Umayyad Caliphate control.
The first invasion (647–648), led by Abdallah ibn Saad under Caliph Uthman, targeted the Exarchate of Carthage. The Arabs defeated the Byzantine patrician Gregory at the Battle of Sufetula, weakening Byzantine authority in Ifriqiya. However, the campaign did not extend beyond raiding. After a period of civil war in the Muslim world, a second wave began around 665–689. Oqba ibn Nafi played a central role: in 670, he founded the city of Kairouan, which became a major Islamic base and cultural centre. He led ambitious campaigns deep into the interior, reportedly reaching the Atlantic coast, but faced strong resistance from Byzantine and Berber forces. A coalition led by the Berber leader Kusayla ambushed and killed Oqba at the Battle of Tahouda in 683. Kusayla temporarily captured Kairouan before being defeated.
The third and decisive phase (697–709) was led by Hassan ibn al-Nu'man and later Musa ibn Nusayr. Hassan recaptured and destroyed Carthage in 697 after fierce fighting against Byzantine reinforcements. A major Berber resistance then emerged under the legendary queen Kahina (Dihya), who initially defeated the Arabs in the Aurès Mountains. However, Hassan returned with fresh troops, defeated and killed Kahina around 697. Musa ibn Nusayr completed the conquest of the western Maghreb, subduing Berber tribes, capturing Tangier, and integrating many converted Berbers into the Muslim army. By 709, the entire Maghreb was under Umayyad control.
Following the Berber general Tariq ibn Ziyad's conquest of Visigothic Spain in 711, Islam had already spread throughout North Africa, and Berbers actively participated in raids into Europe, reaching as far as Lyon and Autun in France. However, Berber converts were still treated as second-class non-Arabs; the difficult conquest of the Maghreb prompted the Umayyads to impose heavy taxation and oppressive governance. Attracted by ideals of equality and religious purity, many Berbers supported Kharijite movements, triggering frequent revolts in Ifriqiya.   

Following the Berber revolt numerous independent states emerged across the Maghreb. In 778, Abdel Rahman Ibn Rustam established a Kharijite emirate at Tahert in central Algeria known as the Rustamid imamate, marking the first independent Muslim state in the Maghrib. At its peak, the kingdom extended from Tlemcen to Tripoli. It prospered through trans-Saharan trade. The Rustamids faced constant threats from the Aghlabids, backed by the Abbasid Caliphate, in the east, and the Alid Idrisids in the west. Due to the strict religious nature of Ibadi society, the imams frequently dealt with internal rebellions, which weakened their authority unless the ruler was particularly charismatic. The dynasty was defeated by the Fatimids in 909, prompting the Ibadis to settle in the M'zab region.   

The Fatimid da'wa entered the Maghreb through the skilled Ismaili Shia missionary Abu Abdullah al-San'ani (al-Shi'i), who arrived around 900 and settled among the Kabyle Kutama Berbers near Sétif. He gradually gained their support through preaching the coming of the Mahdi, organized them militarily, and succeeded in overthrowing the Aghlabid dynasty. In 909, he captured Kairouan and prepared the ground for the Fatimid state. He then liberated Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi from prison in Sijilmasa and handed him power. Al-Mahdi declared himself Caliph in 910, becoming the founder of the Fatimid Caliphate in Ifriqiya (Tunisia). The Fatimids imposed Ismaili Shia doctrine, faced strong opposition from the Sunni Maliki population, and dealt with several revolts, especially the major rebellion of Abu Yazid (the Man of the Donkey).  
The Fatimids built a powerful army and navy and achieved military successes. They maintained control of Sicily, raided northern Italy (934–935 and 1004–1015), and developed a prosperous economy there, with many mosques, sugar cane, papyrus, and cotton production that rivalled Spain. In this way, the Fatimids established a powerful North African empire that would not be rivalled until the rise of the Almoravids and Almohads. Their greatest achievement was the successful shift of the caliphate's centre to Egypt; Under al-Mu'izz, the brilliant general Jawhar al-Siqilli conquered Egypt in 969, founded Cairo and al-Azhar University, and the Fatimids moved their capital to Egypt in 971. 

After the Fatimids transferred their capital to Egypt in 971, they appointed Buluggin ibn Ziri, a Sanhaja Berber leader, as their governor over Ifriqiya and the central Maghreb. This marked the beginning of the Zirid Dynasty (362–543 AH / 973–1152 CE), which ruled from Achir then al-Mansuriyya near Kairouan. Buluggin founded the cities of Algiers, Médéa and Miliana, making central Algeria politically important. He then expanded his authority across Algeria and most of Morocco briefly, fighting Zenata tribes. Under al-Mu'izz ibn Badis, the Zirids cut ties with the Shia Fatimids in 1043, adopted Sunni Islam, and recognized the Abbasid Caliphate. In retaliation, the Fatimids sent the Arab tribes of Banū Hilāl and Banū Sulaym, whose invasion caused widespread destruction, especially in Kairouan. The Zirid state gradually weakened and fragmented.
A branch of the family, led by Hammad ibn Buluggin, broke away and established the Hammadid Dynasty (408–552 AH / 1018–1152 CE) in central Algeria. Their first capital was Qal'at Bani Hammad, later moving to Béjaïa (Bougie), which became a major prosperous city. The Hammadids developed a strong navy, promoted agriculture, industry, trade, and culture. Cities like Al-Qal’a' and Béjaïa flourished with scholars, poets, and architects. However, the dynasty suffered from internal divisions, revolts, attacks by the Almoravids, and Genoese raids on the coast. The Hammadids were finally defeated by Abd al-Mu'min, the founder of the Almohad Caliphate, in 1152, ending both Sanhaja dynasties in the region.
The Almoravids (Al-Murabitun), a puritanical religious-military movement of Sanhaja Berbers (mainly the Lamtuna tribe) from the Sahara in Mauritania, was founded in the mid-11th century by the Maliki scholar Abd Allah ibn Yasin. The movement emphasized strict adherence to Maliki Sunni Islam. Under leaders like Yusuf ibn Tashfin, they built a powerful empire, establishing Marrakesh as their capital in 1062. They conquered Sijilmasa, Fez, much of western and central Algeria (including Tlemcen, Oran, and Algiers in 1082), and defeated the Ghana Empire in the south. They also intervened in al-Andalus (Spain), defeating Christian forces and extending their rule there. The Almoravids strengthened Maliki Islam and brought Andalusian cultural influence to the Maghreb, but their rigid legalism later contributed to their downfall. They were overthrown by the Almohads, who captured Marrakesh in 1147. 
The Almoravids' successors were the Almohads (Al-Muwahhidun), meaning "Unitarians"; a reformist movement founded by Muhammad ibn Tumart, a Masmuda Berber who proclaimed himself the Mahdi. They emphasized the absolute unity of God (Tawhid) and opposed what they viewed as Almoravid religious errors. Abd al-Mu'min became the first Almohad Caliph and completed the conquest of the Maghreb by 1147, unifying the region for the first time. In Algeria, they ended the Hammadid dynasty by capturing Béjaïa, Algiers, and Qal'at Bani Hammad. The empire reached its peak under Abu Yaqub Yusuf and Yaqub al-Mansur, who patronized philosophy (including Ibn Rushd/Averroes and Ibn Tufayl), arts, and architecture, while maintaining control in al-Andalus. However, major defeats against Christian forces, especially at Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212, and internal divisions led to the empire's collapse. By the mid-13th century, the Almohad state fragmented, giving rise to the Hafsids in Ifriqiya, the Zayyanids in Tlemcen, and the Marinids in Fez.

Following the collapse of the Almohad Empire, Yaghmurasen ibn Zayyan founded a Zanata Berber dynasty known as the Zayyanid or Abd al-Wadid dynasty, which ruled the central Maghrib from 1236 to 1550. The dynasty produced 27 rulers and made Tlemcen its capital. The Zayyanids generally used the title of emir, though some adopted shaykh or khalifa. Their administration included qadis and wazirs. Thanks to its strategic location on the trans-Saharan trade routes, Tlemcen flourished as a major political, economic, and cultural centre, famous for trade in leather goods, precious metals, and slaves. Zayyanid rulers actively supported learning by constructing mosques and madrasas, turning their capital into an important theological and intellectual hub. Their history is relatively well documented, particularly through the works of the famous historian Ibn Khaldun.
Geopolitically, the kingdom was constantly threatened by its powerful neighbours — the Marinids of Morocco to the west and the Hafsids of Ifriqiya to the east — while also facing internal family intrigues and hostility from rival Zanata tribes. Several rulers stood out in the 14th century, notably Abu Hammu I (1308–1318), who restored Tlemcen and expanded influence eastward; Abu Tashfin I (1318–1337), a patron of education and literature who died defending the city against the Marinids; Abu Hammu II (1359–1389), known for his resilience in recovering Tlemcen multiple times; and his son Abu Tashfin II, who conspired against him, making Tlemcen a Marinid vassal. Over time, the dynasty weakened due to endless external conflicts and internal betrayals, with the last Zayyanid rulers becoming Spanish then Ottoman vassals.

Early modern era
After the fall of Granada in 1492, the Ottoman Regency of Algiers on the North African coast emerged during the Ottoman–Habsburg struggles of the 16th century as a response to increasing Spanish encroachement on Algerian coastal cities. The regency was founded in 1516 by the corsair brothers Aruj Barbarossa and Hayreddin Barbarossa, who seized Algiers with local support against Spanish expansion and placed the territory under the protection of the Ottoman Empire. Although nominally loyal to the Ottoman sultan, the Regency gradually evolved into a highly autonomous "imperial state" dominated by janissaries, corsair captains, and the divan council rather than direct Ottoman administration. 
Over the centuries, power shifted through several ruling systems: beylerbeys appointed by Istanbul, then pashas and aghas, before the era of the deys began in 1671. In practice, authority often rested with the Odjak (the janissary corps) and the ta'ifa of corsair captains, while the dey ruled through negotiation with military elites. Historians have described the Regency as a "military republic", combining Ottoman administrative institutions with local political traditions inherited from medieval North African states. 
The Regency became one of the major naval powers of the Mediterranean during the 16th and 17th centuries. Its economy relied on privateering, slave-taking, ransom, manufacturing, tribute payments, agriculture and maritime trade. Corsair fleets operating from Algiers attacked European shipping across the Mediterranean and even into the Atlantic, forcing states such as Britain, France, Spain, the Netherlands, Denmark, and later the young United States to pay tribute or negotiate treaties directly with Algiers. The city itself became wealthy and heavily fortified, especially after failed European expeditions such as the attack of Emperor Charles V in 1541. The Casbah, one of the most fascinating urban neighborhoods in the world, was built during this period.

Internally, the Regency expanded its authority over much of present-day Algeria while allowing considerable autonomy to tribal and regional leaders. Political and military power in Algeria was largely controlled by the Turks, while Algerian locals mainly served as taxpayers, soldiers, merchants and religious officials. Socially, Algeria resembled pre-Revolutionary southern European societies, with a powerful aristocracy, a poor peasantry, a weak middle class, and little influence from Enlightenment ideas. Tensions sometimes emerged between the Turkish janissary elite, local populations, and the Kouloughlis (people of mixed Turkish and Algerian ancestry), leading to revolts and political instability. Although dissatisfaction with Ottoman injustice and corruption was widespread, it was counterbalanced by religious loyalty to the Ottoman Caliphate, gratitude for Ottoman protection against the Spanish, fear of European ambitions, strong cultural links, and the absence of a strong middle class or national unity. Algerian society was deeply influenced by religion and absolute rule, with education centered on religious studies under clerical authority. 
Algiers maintained diplomatic relations with European powers and acted increasingly independently from Istanbul, especially after the janissary coup of 1659 and the consolidation of dey rule in the 18th century. By the early 19th century, the Regency began to decline. European naval superiority, the weakening of corsair warfare after the Napoleonic era, internal unrest, economic difficulties, and repeated bombardments reduced Algerian power. The Barbary Wars and the Anglo-Dutch bombardment of Algiers further weakened the state and forced concessions to the United States and European powers. Relations with France deteriorated after the 1827 Fly-Whisk Incident, when Dey Hussein struck the French consul during a dispute over debts and grain payments. France used the episode as a pretext to invade in 1830, capturing Algiers and ending the Regency after more than three centuries of existence. Resistance continued in Constantine under Ahmed Bey ben Mohamed Chérif until 1837. 
Today, many Algerian historians regard the Regency period as a foundational stage of modern Algerian statehood and national consciousness, since it unified much of the territory, developed enduring political institutions, and fostered an early sense of Algerian identity under the name "Al-Jaza’ir." Prominent historian Abou el-Kacem Saadallah refers to the Regency as the "Algerian Ancien régime". Historian Ahmad Tawfiq al-Madani regards it as the "first Algerian state" and the "Algerian Ottoman republic".

French colonisation (1830–1962)
Although the French dismantled the Ottoman Regency of Algiers, an embryonic form of Algerian nationalism and state consciousness already existed. When the French invaded, local tribes rallied to support the Ottomans despite their resistance to the Regency. The French gradually expanded control, capturing Constantine in 1837. In western Algeria, Emir Abdelkader organized a real state and led fierce resistance against the French, notably at the Battle of Macta (1835). After years of war, marked by ruthless French tactics including razzias, he surrendered in 1847. He remains Algeria's greatest national hero, and his struggle deeply inspired future Algerian nationalism. Resistance continued through revolts by the Kabyles in the 1850s and 1871, and other uprisings, all brutally suppressed, followed by massive land expropriation. According to several historians, the methods used by the French to establish control over Algeria reached genocidal proportions. Historian Ben Kiernan wrote on the French conquest of Algeria: "By 1875, the French conquest was complete. The war had killed approximately 825,000 indigenous Algerians since 1830". French losses from 1831 to 1851 were 92,329 dead in the hospital and only 3,336 killed in action.
Colonial Algeria was marked by tensions between military rule and European settlers. While formally assimilated as French departments in 1848, it operated under a governor-general and institutions that strongly favoured settlers, who became known as colons and later, as Pied-Noirs. By 1848, European population stood at more than 100.000, and reached 244.600 by 1872. Napoleon III's more sympathetic policies toward Muslims alarmed the settlers. After the Franco-Prussian War, the Third Republic firmly established settler dominance, reinforced by figures like Eugène Étienne. A settler uprising in 1898 led to greater autonomy for the colonial administration in Algiers. The economy became heavily dependent on France, dominated by vineyards at the expense of food production, leaving the Muslim population marginalized, discriminated against, and impoverished. By the early 20th century, the colons formed a majority of the population in both Algiers and Oran.

Algerian nationalism emerged before World War I through moderate, French-educated Jeunes Algériens, who demanded genuine assimilation and equal rights. World War I proved transformative: Algerians fought bravely (25,000 dead) and worked in French factories, yet promised reforms like the Jonnart Law (1919) were largely undermined by settler opposition. This radicalized the movement. Emir Khaled (grandson of Abdelkader) called for broader democratic rights and was deported in 1923. Ferhat Abbas shifted from assimilationism after the rejection of the Blum-Viollette bill (1936). Messali Hadj consistently demanded full independence through the ENA and PPA, while Shaykh Ben Badis fostered cultural and Islamic nationalism via the AUMA (1931), promoting Arabic and Algerian identity.During the Second World War, Algeria came under Vichy control before being liberated by the Allies in Operation Torch, which saw the first large-scale deployment of American troops in the North African campaign. In 1943, Abbas issued the Manifesto of the Algerian People demanding autonomy. Growing unity among nationalists through the AML movement, combined with French repression, led to the violent massacre at Sétif and Guelma in May 1945, where brutal colonial reprisals convinced many that armed struggle was the only solution. The flawed Organic Statute of 1947 further alienated the younger generation. A group of militants, including Ahmed Ben Bella, Hocine Ait Ahmed, Rabah Bitat, Larbi Ben M’hidi, and others — later known as the historic leaders — broke away and formed the CRUA in 1953, which became the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) in 1954, preparing the country for the Algerian War of Independence.
The Algerian War was one of the most important Third World anti-colonial struggles. It succeeded due to the FLN's consistent pursuit of its core objectives (as outlined in the 1 November 1954 Proclamation and the 1956 Soummam Conference); attracting international attention to the struggle for "the restoration of the Algerian state." The FLN's military wing, known as the ALN, managed to pose a serious security threat to France while surviving deep internal rivalries.

The war began with coordinated FLN attacks on 31 October–1 November 1954. France responded with military force combined with social and economic measures under leaders like Mendès-France, Soustelle (who promoted "integration"), and later Guy Mollet. Violence escalated dramatically after the FLN's brutal attacks in the Nord Constantinois in August 1955. The FLN used hit and run attacks in Algeria and France as part of its war, and the French conducted severe reprisals. In addition, the French destroyed over 8,000 villages and relocated over 2 million Algerians to concentration camps. The Battle of Algiers (1956–57) saw the FLN resort to urban terrorism and bombings, which the French paratroopers crushed using torture — gaining military victory but suffering major political damage.
The conflict was marked by fierce internal divisions: FLN vs. Messali Hadj's MNA (resulting in bloody fratricidal massacres like Mélouza), and tensions between "internal" and "external" FLN forces. The French army, drawing lessons from Indochina, achieved significant military successes, notably with the Morice Line and General Challe's campaigns, but faced growing political frustration.
After Charles de Gaulle's return to power in 1958, the FLN created the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic (GPRA) and appointed Ferhat Abbas as its president. The GPRA rejected de Gaulle's ceasefire proposal termed "Peace of the Brave", causing him to shift his position toward self-determination (announced in 1959). This triggered settler and military revolts, including the failed putsch of April 1961 by generals led by Challe and Salan, who later joined the terrorist OAS. After difficult negotiations, the Évian Accords were signed in March 1962, leading to a ceasefire and a referendum in which Algerians overwhelmingly voted for independence. Algeria became independent on 5 July 1962, ending 132 years of French colonial rule.
The human cost was immense, Historians, like Alistair Horne and Raymond Aron, state that the actual number of Algerian Muslim war dead was far greater than the original FLN and official French estimates but was less than the 1 million deaths claimed by the Algerian government after independence. Horne estimated Algerian casualties during the span of eight years to be around 700,000. The war uprooted more than 2 million Algerians. 
The number of European Pied-Noirs who fled Algeria totalled more than 900,000 between 1962 and 1964. The exodus to mainland France accelerated after the Oran massacre of 1962, in which many Europeans were murdered as reprisal for OAS terror attacks. It is estimated that between 30,000 and 150,000 Harkis and their dependents were killed by the FLN or by lynch mobs in Algeria. The country was left devastated: massive displacement, economic collapse due to the sudden departure of most European settlers, and deep social trauma.

The first three decades of independence (1962–1991)
The FLN's fragile unity broke down immediately after independence, leading to power struggles between the GPRA's president Ben Youcef Ben Khedda, other GPRA members including Ait Ahmed, Rabah Bitat and Ahmed Ben Bella. The latter was supported by the external ALN under Houari Boumedienne who marched on Algiers. After mass demonstrations organised by the UGTA, civil war was avoided and Ben Bella took power in September 1962. The new nation faced enormous challenges in rebuilding a dislocated economy and forging a coherent national identity.
Algeria's first president was the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) leader Ahmed Ben Bella. A territorial dispute arising from Morocco's claims to portions of western Algeria led to the Sand War in 1963. Ben Bella was overthrown in 1965 by Houari Boumédiène, his former ally and defence minister. Under Ben Bella, the government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian; Boumédienne continued this trend. However, he relied much more on the army for his support, and reduced the sole legal party to a symbolic role. He collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialisation drive. Oil extraction facilities were nationalised. This was especially beneficial to the leadership after the international 1973 oil crisis.
Boumédienne's successor, Chadli Bendjedid, introduced some liberal economic reforms. He promoted a policy of Arabisation in Algerian society and public life. Teachers of Arabic, brought in from other Muslim countries, spread conventional Islamic thought in schools and sowed the seeds of a return to Orthodox Islam.
The Algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil, leading to hardship when the price collapsed during the 1980s oil glut. Economic recession caused by the crash in world oil prices resulted in Algerian social unrest during the 1980s; by the end of the decade, Bendjedid introduced a multi-party system. Political parties developed, such as the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), a broad coalition of Muslim groups.

Civil War (1991–2002) and aftermath
In December 1991 the Islamic Salvation Front dominated the first of two rounds of legislative elections. Fearing the election of an Islamist government, the authorities intervened on 11 January 1992, cancelling the elections. Bendjedid resigned and a High Council of State was installed to act as the Presidency. It banned the FIS, triggering a civil insurgency between the Front's armed wing, the Armed Islamic Group, and the national armed forces, in which more than 100,000 people are thought to have died. The Islamist militants conducted a violent campaign of civilian massacres. At several points in the conflict, the situation in Algeria became a point of international concern, most notably during the crisis surrounding Air France Flight 8969, a hijacking perpetrated by the Armed Islamic Group. The Armed Islamic Group declared a ceasefire in October 1997.
Algeria held elections in 1999, considered biased by international observers and most opposition groups which were won by President Abdelaziz Bouteflika. He worked to restore political stability to the country and announced a "Civil Concord" initiative, approved in a referendum, under which many political prisoners were pardoned, and several thousand members of armed groups were granted exemption from prosecution under a limited amnesty, in force until 13 January 2000. The AIS disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly. The Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat (GSPC), a splinter group of the Armed Islamic Group, continued a terrorist campaign against the Government.
Bouteflika was re-elected in the April 2004 presidential election after campaigning on a programme of national reconciliation. The programme comprised economic, institutional, political and social reform to modernise the country, raise living standards, and tackle the causes of alienation. It also included a second amnesty initiative, the Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation, which was approved in a referendum in September 2005. It offered amnesty to most guerrillas and Government security forces.
In November 2008, the Algerian Constitution was amended following a vote in Parliament, removing the two-term limit on Presidential incumbents. This change enabled Bouteflika to stand for re-election in the 2009 presidential elections, and he was re-elected in April 2009. During his election campaign and following his re-election, Bouteflika promised to extend the programme of national reconciliation and a $150-billion spending programme to create three million new jobs, the construction of one million new housing units, and to continue public sector and infrastructure modernisation programmes.
A continuing series of protests throughout the country started on 28 December 2010, inspired by similar protests across the Middle East and North Africa. On 24 February 2011, the government lifted Algeria's 19-year-old state of emergency. The government enacted legislation dealing with political parties, the electoral code, and the representation of women in elected bodies. In April 2011, Bouteflika promised further constitutional and political reform. However, elections are routinely criticised by opposition groups as unfair and international human rights groups say that media censorship and harassment of political opponents continue.
On 2 April 2019, Bouteflika resigned from the presidency after mass protests against his candidacy for a fifth term in office.
In December 2019, Abdelmadjid Tebboune became Algeria's president, after winning the first round of the presidential election with a record abstention rate – the highest of all presidential elections since Algeria's democracy in 1989. Tebboune is accused of being close to the military and being loyal to the deposed president. Tebboune rejects these accusations, claiming to be the victim of a witch hunt. He also reminds his detractors that he was expelled from the Government in August 2017 at the instigation of oligarchs languishing in prison. In September 2024, President Tebboune won a second term with a landslide 84.3 percent of the vote, although his opponents called the results fraud.

Geography
Since the 2011 breakup of Sudan, and the creation of South Sudan, Algeria has been the largest country in Africa. It is also the largest country of the Mediterranean basin. Its southern part includes a significant portion of the Sahara. To the north, the Tell Atlas forms with the Saharan Atlas, further south, two parallel sets of reliefs in approaching eastbound, and between which are inserted vast plains and highlands. Both Atlas tend to merge in eastern Algeria. The vast mountain ranges of Aures and Nememcha occupy the entire northeastern Algeria and are delineated by the Tunisian border. The highest point is Mount Tahat (3,003 metres or 9,852 feet).
Algeria lies mostly between latitudes 19° and 37°N (a small area is north of 37°N and south of 19°N), and longitudes 9°W and 12°E. Most of the coastal area is hilly, sometimes even mountainous, and there are a few natural harbours. The area from the coast to the Tell Atlas is fertile. South of the Tell Atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the Saharan Atlas; farther south, there is the Sahara desert.
The Hoggar Mountains (Arabic: جبال هقار), also known as the Hoggar, are a highland region in central Sahara, southern Algeria. They are located about 1,500 km (932 mi) south of the capital, Algiers, and just east of Tamanghasset. Algiers, Oran, Constantine, and Annaba are Algeria's main cities.

Climate and hydrology
In this region, midday desert temperatures can be hot year round. After sunset, however, the clear, dry air permits rapid loss of heat, and the nights are cool to chilly. Enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded.
Rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the Tell Atlas, ranging from 400 to 670 mm (15.7 to 26.4 in) annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east. Precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern Algeria, where it reaches as much as 1,000 mm (39.4 in) in some years.
Farther inland, the rainfall is less plentiful. Algeria also has ergs, or sand dunes, between mountains. Among these, in the summer time when winds are heavy and gusty, temperatures can go up to 43.3 °C (110 °F).

Fauna and flora
The varied vegetation of Algeria includes coastal, mountainous and grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife.
In Algeria forest cover is around 1% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,949,000 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 1,667,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,439,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 510,000 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 6% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 80% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 18% private ownership and 2% with ownership listed as other or unknown.
Many of the creatures constituting the Algerian wildlife live in close proximity to civilisation. The most commonly seen animals include the wild boars, jackals, and gazelles, although it is not uncommon to spot fennecs (foxes), and jerboas. Algeria also has a small African leopard and Saharan cheetah population, but these are seldom seen. A species of deer, the Barbary stag, inhabits the dense humid forests in the north-eastern areas. The fennec fox is the national animal of Algeria.
A variety of bird species makes the country an attraction for bird watchers. The forests are inhabited by boars and jackals. Barbary macaques are the sole native monkey. Snakes, monitor lizards, and numerous other reptiles can be found living among an array of rodents throughout the semi arid regions of Algeria. Many animals are now extinct, including the Barbary lions, Atlas bears and crocodiles.
In the north, some of the native flora includes Macchia scrub, olive trees, oaks, cedars and other conifers. The mountain regions contain large forests of evergreens (Aleppo pine, juniper, and evergreen oak) and some deciduous trees. Fig, eucalyptus, agave, and various palm trees grow in the warmer areas. The grape vine is indigenous to the coast. In the Sahara region, some oases have palm trees. Acacias with wild olives are the predominant flora in the remainder of the Sahara. Algeria had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.22/10, ranking it 106th globally out of 172 countries.

Camels are used extensively; the desert also abounds with venomous and nonvenomous snakes, scorpions, and numerous insects.

Government and politics
Algeria's government has been described as authoritarian, and elected politicians have relatively little sway over affairs in the country. Instead, a group of unelected civilian and military "décideurs" ("deciders") known as "le pouvoir" ("the power") exercise de facto rule over the country, even deciding who should be president. The most powerful man might have been Mohamed Mediène, the head of military intelligence, before he was brought down during the 2019 protests. In recent years, many of these generals have died, retired, or been imprisoned. After the death of General Larbi Belkheir, previous president Bouteflika put loyalists in key posts, notably at Sonatrach, and secured constitutional amendments that made him re-electable indefinitely, until he was brought down in 2019 during protests.
The head of state is the President of Algeria, who is elected for a five-year term. The president is limited to two five-year terms. The 2019 presidential election had been planned to be in April 2019, but widespread protests had erupted on 22 February against the president's decision to participate in the election, which had resulted in President Bouteflika announcing his resignation on 2 April. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, an independent candidate, was elected as president after the election eventually took place on 12 December 2019. Protestors refused to recognise Tebboune as president, citing demands for comprehensive reform of the political system. Algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of age. The President is the head of the army, the Council of Ministers and the High Security Council. He appoints the Prime Minister who is also the head of government.

The Algerian parliament is bicameral; the lower house, the People's National Assembly, has 462 members who are directly elected for five-year terms, while the upper house, the Council of the Nation, has 144 members serving six-year terms, of which 96 members are chosen by local assemblies and 48 are appointed by the president. According to the constitution, no political association may be formed if it is "based on differences in religion, language, race, gender, profession, or region". In addition, political campaigns must be exempt from the aforementioned subjects.
Parliamentary elections were last held in June 2021. In the elections, the FLN lost 66 of its seats, but remained the largest party with 98 seats. Other parties included the Movement of the Society for Peace which won 65 seats, the National Rally for Democracy which won 58 seats, the Future Front which won 48 seats, and the National Construction Movement which won 39 seats.

Foreign relations
Algeria is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
Giving incentives and rewarding best performers, as well as offering funds in a faster and more flexible manner, are the two main principles underlying the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) that came into force in 2014. It has a budget of €15.4 billion and provides the bulk of funding through a number of programmes.
In 2009, the French government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in Algeria. Defence Minister Hervé Morin stated that "It's time for our country to be at peace with itself, at peace thanks to a system of compensation and reparations", when presenting the draft law on the payouts. Algerian officials and activists believe that this is a good first step and hope that this move would encourage broader reparation.
Tensions between Algeria and Morocco in relation to the Western Sahara have been an obstacle to tightening the Arab Maghreb Union, nominally established in 1989, but which has carried little practical weight. On 24 August 2021, Algeria announced the break of diplomatic relations with Morocco.
Algeria's current foreign minister is Ahmed Attaf. Their representative to the United Nations is Amar Bendjama.

Military
The military of Algeria consists of the People's National Army (ANP), the Algerian National Navy (MRA), and the Algerian Air Force (QJJ), plus the Territorial Air Defence Forces. It is the direct successor of the National Liberation Army (Armée de Libération Nationale or ALN), the armed wing of the nationalist National Liberation Front which fought French colonial occupation during the Algerian War of Independence (1954–62).
Total military personnel include 147,000 active, 150,000 reserve, and 187,000 paramilitary staff (2008 estimate). Service in the military is compulsory for men aged 19–30, for a total of 12 months. The military expenditure was 4.3% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012. Algeria has the second-largest military in North Africa with the largest defence budget in Africa ($10 billion). Most of Algeria's weapons are imported from Russia, with whom they are a close ally.
In 2007, the Algerian Air Force signed a deal with Russia to purchase 49 MiG-29SMT and 6 MiG-29UBT at an estimated cost of $1.9 billion. Russia is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for Algeria.

Human rights
Algeria has been categorised by the US government funded Freedom House as "not free" since it began publishing such ratings in 1972, with the exception of 1989, 1990, and 1991, when the country was labelled "partly free". In December 2016, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor issued a report regarding violation of media freedom in Algeria. It clarified that the Algerian government imposed restrictions on freedom of the press; expression; and right to peaceful demonstration, protest and assembly as well as intensified censorship of the media and websites. Due to the fact that the journalists and activists criticise the ruling government, some media organisations' licenses are cancelled.
Independent and autonomous trade unions face routine harassment from the government, with many leaders imprisoned and protests suppressed. In 2016, a number of unions, many of which were involved in the 2010–2012 Algerian Protests, have been deregistered by the government.
Homosexuality is illegal in Algeria. Public homosexual behaviour is punishable by up to two years in prison. Despite this, about 26% of Algerians think that homosexuality should be accepted, according to the survey conducted by the BBC News Arabic-Arab Barometer in 2019. Algeria showed the highest LGBT acceptance compared to other Arab countries where the survey was conducted.
Human Rights Watch has accused the Algerian authorities of using the COVID-19 pandemic as an excuse to prevent pro-democracy movements and protests in the country, leading to the arrest of youths as part of social distancing.

Administrative divisions
Algeria is divided into 69 provinces (wilayas), 553 districts (daïras) and 1,541 municipalities (baladiyahs). Each province, district, and municipality is named after its seat, which is usually the largest city.
The administrative divisions have changed several times since independence. When introducing new provinces, the numbers of old provinces are kept, hence the non-alphabetical order. With their official numbers, currently (since 1983) they are:

Economy
Algeria's currency is the dinar (DZD). The economy remains dominated by the state, a legacy of the country's socialist post-independence development model. In June 2024 The World Bank's 2024 report marks a turning point for Algeria, which joins the select club of upper-middle-income countries. This economic rise, the result of an ambitious development strategy, places the country in the same category as emerging powers such as China, Brazil and Turkey In recent years, the Algerian government has halted the privatisation of state-owned industries and imposed restrictions on imports and foreign involvement in its economy. These restrictions are just starting to be lifted off recently although questions about Algeria's slowly-diversifying economy remain.
Algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy. The government's efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector have done little to reduce high youth unemployment rates or to address housing shortages. The country is facing a number of short-term and medium-term problems, including the need to diversify the economy, strengthen political, economic and financial reforms, improve the business climate and reduce inequalities among regions.
A wave of economic protests in February and March 2011 prompted the Algerian government to offer more than $23 billion in public grants and retroactive salary and benefit increases. Public spending has increased by 27% annually during the past five years. The 2010–14 public-investment programme will cost US$286 billion, 40% of which will go to human development.

Thanks to strong hydrocarbon revenues, Algeria has a cushion of $173 billion in foreign currency reserves and a large hydrocarbon stabilization fund. In addition, Algeria's external debt is low at about 2% of GDP. The economy remains very dependent on hydrocarbon wealth, and, despite high foreign exchange reserves (US$178 billion, equivalent to three years of imports), current expenditure growth makes Algeria's budget more vulnerable to the risk of prolonged lower hydrocarbon revenues.
Algeria has not joined the WTO, despite several years of negotiations but is a member of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area, the African Continental Free Trade Area, and has an association agreement with the European Union.
Turkish direct investments have accelerated in Algeria, with total value reaching $5 billion. As of 2022, the number of Turkish companies present in Algeria has reached 1,400. In 2020, despite the pandemic, more than 130 Turkish companies were created in Algeria.

Oil and natural resources
Algeria, whose economy is reliant on petroleum, has been an member of the OPEC cartel since 1969. Its crude oil production stands at around 1.1 million barrels/day, but it is also a major gas producer and exporter, with important links to Europe. Hydrocarbons have long been the backbone of the economy, accounting for roughly 60% of budget revenues, 30% of GDP, and 87.7% of export earnings. Algeria has the 10th-largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas exporter. The U.S. Energy Information Administration reported that in 2005, Algeria had 4.5 trillion cubic metres (160×10^12 cu ft) of proven natural gas reserves. It also ranks 16th in oil reserves.
Non-hydrocarbon growth for 2011 was projected at 5%. To cope with social demands, the authorities raised expenditure, especially on basic food support, employment creation, support for SMEs, and higher salaries. High hydrocarbon prices have improved the current account and the already large international reserves position.
Income from oil and gas rose in 2011 as a result of continuing high oil prices, though the trend in production volume is downward. Production from the oil and gas sector in terms of volume continues to decline, dropping from 43.2 million tonnes to 32 million tonnes between 2007 and 2011. Nevertheless, the sector accounted for 98% of the total volume of exports in 2011, against 48% in 1962, and 70% of budgetary receipts, or US$71.4 billion.
The Algerian national oil company is Sonatrach, which plays a key role in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in Algeria. All foreign operators must work in partnership with Sonatrach, which usually has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements.
Access to biocapacity in Algeria is lower than world average. In 2016, Algeria had 0.53 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In 2016, Algeria used 2.4 global hectares of biocapacity per person – their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use just under 4.5 times as much biocapacity as Algeria contains. As a result, Algeria is running a biocapacity deficit. In April 2022, diplomats from Italy and Spain held talks after Rome's move to secure large volume of Algerian gas stoked concerns in Madrid. Under the deal between Algeria's Sonatrach and Italy's Eni, Algeria will send an additional 9 billion cubic metres of gas to Italy by next year and in 2024.

Research and alternative energy sources
Algeria has invested an estimated 100 billion dinars towards developing research facilities and paying researchers. This development programme is meant to advance alternative energy production, especially solar and wind power. Algeria is estimated to have the largest solar energy potential in the Mediterranean, so the government has funded the creation of a solar science park in Hassi R'Mel. Currently, Algeria has 20,000 research professors at various universities and over 780 research labs, with state-set goals to expand to 1,000. Besides solar energy, areas of research in Algeria include space and satellite telecommunications, nuclear power and medical research.

Labour market
The overall rate of unemployment was 11.8% in 2023. The government strengthened in 2011 the job programmes introduced in 1988, in particular in the framework of the programme to aid those seeking work (Dispositif d'Aide à l'Insertion Professionnelle). Youth unemployment was 29.4% in 2025.

Tourism
The development of the tourism sector in Algeria had previously been hampered by a lack of facilities, but since 2004 a broad tourism development strategy has been implemented resulting in many hotels of a high modern standard being built.
There are several UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Algeria which includes Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad, the first capital of the Hammadid empire; Tipasa, a Phoenician and later Roman town; Djémila and Timgad, both Roman ruins; M'Zab Valley, a limestone valley containing a large urbanised oasis; and the Casbah of Algiers, an important citadel. The only natural World Heritage Site in Algeria is the Tassili n'Ajjer, a mountain range.

Transport
Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Algeria:

Cairo-Dakar Highway
Algiers-Lagos Highway
The Algerian road network is the densest in Africa; its length is estimated at 180,000 km (110,000 mi) of highways, with more than 3,756 structures and a paving rate of 85%. This network has been complemented by the East-West Highway, a major infrastructure project completed in 2023. It is a three-way, 1,216-kilometre-long (756 mi) highway, linking Annaba in the extreme east to the Tlemcen in the far west. Algeria is also crossed by the Trans-Sahara Highway, which is now completely paved. This road is supported by the Algerian government to increase trade between the six countries crossed: Algeria, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Chad, and Tunisia.

Demographics
At the outset of the 20th century, Algeria's population was approximately 4 million. in 2024, Algeria has a population of an estimated 47.4 million.
About 90% of Algerians live in the northern, coastal area; the inhabitants of the Sahara desert are mainly concentrated in oases, although some 1.5 million remain nomadic or partly nomadic. 28.1% of Algerians are under the age of 15.
Between 90,000 and 165,000 Sahrawis from Western Sahara live in the Sahrawi refugee camps, in the western Algerian Sahara desert. There are also more than 4,000 Palestinian refugees, who are well integrated and have not asked for assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In 2009, 35,000 Chinese migrant workers lived in Algeria.
The largest concentration of Algerian migrants outside Algeria is in France, which has reportedly over 1.7 million Algerians of up to the second generation.
There are also many foreign communities in Algeria, though these do not make up a significant portion of the population.

Ethnic groups
Arabs and indigenous Berbers as well as Phoenicians, Romans, Vandals, Byzantine Greeks, Turks, various Sub-Saharan Africans, and French have contributed to the history and culture of Algeria. Descendants of Andalusi refugees are also present in the population of Algiers and other cities. Moreover, Spanish was spoken by these Aragonese and Castillian Morisco descendants deep into the 18th century, and even Catalan was spoken at the same time by Catalan Morisco descendants in the small town of Grish El-Oued.
Although Algerian law forbids population censuses based on ethnic, religious and linguistic criteria estimates published in non-official sources suggest 75% to 85% of Algeria's population are Arabs. with around 20%–30% identifying as Berber. No official census data in Algeria exist to verify these estimates. Genetic publications on the Algerian population show that the majority of the population is of indigenous Berber ancestry.
The largest groups of Berbers in Algeria are the Kabyles, who live in the Kabylia region east of Algiers, the Chaoui of Northeast Algeria in Aures, the Tuaregs in the southern desert and the Shenwa people of North Algeria.
During the colonial period, there was a large (10% in 1960) European population who became known as Pied-Noirs. They were primarily of French, Spanish and Italian origin. Almost all of this population left during the war of independence or immediately after its end.

Languages
Modern Standard Arabic and Standard Amazigh are the official languages. Algerian Arabic (Dziria) is the language used by the majority of the population. Colloquial Algerian Arabic has some Berber loanwords which represent 8% to 9% of its vocabulary.
Standard Amazigh has been recognised as a "national language" by the constitutional amendment of 8 May 2002. Kabyle, the predominant Berber language, is taught and is partially co-official (with a few restrictions) in parts of Kabylie. Kabyle has a significant Arabic, French, Latin, Greek, Phoenician and Punic substratum, and Arabic loanwords represent 35% of the total Kabyle vocabulary. In February 2016, the Algerian constitution passed a resolution that made Berber an official language alongside Arabic. Algeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1962. Colloquial Algerian Arabic is spoken by about 83% of the population and Berber by 27%.
Although French has no official status in Algeria, it has one of the largest Francophone populations in the world, and French is widely used in government, media (newspapers, radio, local television), and both the education system (from primary school onwards) and academia due to Algeria's colonial history. It can be regarded as a lingua franca of Algeria. In 2008, 11.2 million Algerians could read and write in French. In 2013, it was estimated that 60% of the population could speak or understand French. In 2022, it was estimated that 33% of the population was Francophone.
The use of English in Algeria, though limited in comparison to the previously mentioned languages, has increased due to globalisation. In 2022 it was announced that English would be taught in elementary schools.

Religion
Islam is the predominant religion in Algeria, with its adherents, mostly Sunnis, accounting for 99% of the population according to a 2021 CIA World Factbook estimate, and 98.4% according to Pew Research in 2020. There are about 290,000 Ibadis in the M'zab Valley in the region of Ghardaia.
Prior to independence, Algeria was home to more than 1.3 million Christians (mostly of European ancestry). Most of the Christian settlers left to France after the country's independence. Today, estimates of the Christian population range from 100,000 to 200,000. Algerian citizens who are Christians predominantly belong to Protestant denominations, which have seen increased pressure from the government in recent years including many forced closures.
According to the Arab Barometer in 2018–2019, the vast majority of Algerians (99.1%) continue to identify as Muslim. The June 2019 Arab Barometer-BBC News report found that the percentage of Algerians identifying as non-religious has grown from around 8% in 2013 to around 15% in 2018. The Arab Barometer December 2019, found that the growth in the percentage of Algerians identifying as non-religious is largely driven by young Algerians, with roughly 25% describing themselves as non-religious. However, the 2021 Arab Barometer report found that those who said they were not religious among Algerians has decreased, with just 2.6% identifying as non-religious. In that same report, 69.5% of Algerians identified as religious and another 27.8% identifying as somewhat religious.
Algeria has given the Muslim world a number of prominent thinkers, including Emir Abdelkader, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mouloud Kacem Naît Belkacem, Malek Bennabi and Mohamed Arkoun.

Health
In 2018, Algeria had the highest numbers of physicians in the Maghreb region (1.72 per 1,000 people), nurses (2.23 per 1,000 people), and dentists (0.31 per 1,000 people). Access to "improved water sources" was around 97.4% of the population in urban areas and 98.7% of the population in the rural areas. Some 99% of Algerians living in urban areas, and around 93.4% of those living in rural areas, had access to "improved sanitation". According to the World Bank, Algeria is making progress towards its goal of "reducing by half the number of people without sustainable access to improved drinking water and basic sanitation by 2015". Given Algeria's young population, policy favours preventive health care and clinics over hospitals. In keeping with this policy, the government maintains an immunisation programme. However, poor sanitation and unclean water still cause tuberculosis, hepatitis, measles, typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery. The poor generally receive healthcare free of charge.
Health records have been maintained in Algeria since 1882 and began adding Muslims living in the south to their vital record database in 1905 during French rule.

Education
Since the 1970s, in a centralised system that was designed to significantly reduce the rate of illiteracy, the Algerian government introduced a decree by which school attendance became compulsory for all children aged between 6 and 15 years who have the ability to track their learning through the 20 facilities built since independence, now the literacy rate is around 92.6%. Since 1972, Arabic is used as the language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling. From the third year, French is taught and it is also the language of instruction for science classes. The students can also learn English, Italian, Spanish and German. In 2008, new programmes at the elementary appeared, therefore the compulsory schooling does not start at the age of six anymore, but at the age of five. Apart from the 122 private schools, the Universities of the State are free of charge. After nine years of primary school, students can go to a high school or to an educational institution. The school offers two programmes: general or technical. At the end of the third year of secondary school, students pass the exam of the baccalaureate, which allows once it is successful to pursue graduate studies in universities and institutes.

Education is officially compulsory for children between the ages of six and 15. In 2008, the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 22.3%, 15.6% for men and 29.0% for women. The province with the lowest rate of illiteracy was Algiers Province at 11.6%, while the province with the highest rate was Djelfa Province at 35.5%.
Algeria has 26 universities and 67 institutions of higher education, which must accommodate a million Algerians and 80,000 foreign students in 2008. The University of Algiers, founded in 1879, is the oldest, it offers education in various disciplines (law, medicine, science and letters). Twenty-five of these universities and almost all of the institutions of higher education were founded after the independence of the country.
Even if some of them offer instruction in Arabic like areas of law and the economy, most of the other sectors such as science and medicine continue to be provided in French and English. Among the most important universities, there are the University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene, the University of Mentouri Constantine, and University of Oran Es-Senia. The University of Abou Bekr Belkaïd in Tlemcen and University of Batna Hadj Lakhdar occupy the 26th and 45th row in Africa. Algeria was ranked 115th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, and kept the same rank in the index of 2025.

Culture
Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic, Tamazight and French, has been strongly influenced by the country's recent history. Famous novelists of the 20th century include Mohammed Dib, Albert Camus, Kateb Yacine and Ahlam Mosteghanemi while Assia Djebar is widely translated. Among the important novelists of the 1980s were Rachid Mimouni, later vice-president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views.
Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are noted for their thoughts on decolonisation; Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (modern-day Souk Ahras); and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while staying in Algeria. The works of the Sanusi family in pre-colonial times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times, are widely noted. The Latin author Apuleius was born in Madaurus (Mdaourouch), in what later became Algeria.
Contemporary Algerian cinema is varied in terms of genre, exploring a wider range of themes and issues. There has been a transition from cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned with the everyday lives of Algerians.

Media
Art
Algerian painters, like Mohammed Racim and Baya, attempted to revive the prestigious Algerian past prior to French colonisation, at the same time that they have contributed to the preservation of the authentic values of Algeria. In this line, Mohamed Temam, Abdelkhader Houamel have also returned through this art, scenes from the history of the country, the habits and customs of the past and the country life. Other new artistic currents including the one of M'hamed Issiakhem, Mohammed Khadda and Bachir Yelles, appeared on the scene of Algerian painting, abandoning figurative classical painting to find new pictorial ways, to adapt Algerian paintings to the new realities of the country through its struggle and its aspirations. Mohammed Khadda and M'hamed Issiakhem have been notable in recent years.

Literature
The roots of Algerian literature go back to the Numidian and Roman African era, when Apuleius wrote The Golden Ass, the only Latin novel to survive in its entirety. This period also saw Augustine of Hippo, Nonius Marcellus and Martianus Capella. The Middle Ages also saw several Arabic writers who contributed to Arab literature, with authors like Ahmad al-Buni, Ibn Manzur and Ibn Khaldun, who wrote the Muqaddimah while staying in Algeria. Albert Camus was an Algerian-born French Pied-Noir author. In 1957, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Algerian literature contains works whose main concern is the assertion of Algerian national entity. Examples include novels such as the Algerian trilogy by Mohammed Dib, and Nedjma by Kateb Yacine. Other writers in Algerian literature include Mouloud Feraoun, Malek Bennabi, Malek Haddad, Moufdi Zakaria, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mohamed Laïd Al-Khalifa, Mouloud Mammeri, Frantz Fanon, and Assia Djebar.

In the aftermath of Independence, new authors emerged on the Algerian literary scene, they attempted to expose social problems, among them there are Rachid Boudjedra, Rachid Mimouni, Leila Sebbar, Tahar Djaout and Tahar Ouettar.
Algerian literature includes shocking expression, due to the terrorism that occurred during the 1990s. Other styles have an individualistic conception of the human condition. Among noted more recent work is The Swallows of Kabul and The Attack by Yasmina Khadra, The Oath of Barbarians by Boualem Sansal, Memory of the Flesh by Ahlam Mosteghanemi and the last novel of Assia Djebar Nowhere in My Father's House.

Cinema
The Algerian state's interest in film-industry activities can be seen in the annual budget of DZD 200 million (EUR 1.3 million) allocated to production, specific measures and an ambitious programme plan implemented by the Ministry of Culture to promote national production, renovate the cinema stock and remedy the weak links in distribution and exploitation.
The financial support provided by the state, through the Fund for the Development of the Arts, Techniques and the Film Industry (FDATIC) and the Algerian Agency for Cultural Influence (AARC), plays a key role in the promotion of national production. Between 2007 and 2013, FDATIC subsidised 98 films (feature films, documentaries and short films). In mid-2013, AARC had already supported a total of 78 films, including 42 feature films, 6 short films and 30 documentaries.
According to the European Audiovisual Observatory's LUMIERE database, 41 Algerian films were distributed in Europe between 1996 and 2013; 21 films in this repertoire were Algerian-French co-productions. Days of Glory (2006) and Outside the Law (2010) recorded the highest number of admissions in the European Union, 3,172,612 and 474,722, respectively.
Algeria won the Palme d'Or for Chronicle of the Years of Fire (1975), two Oscars for Z (1969), and other awards for the Italian-Algerian movie The Battle of Algiers.

Cuisine
Algerian cuisine is rich and diverse as a result of interactions and exchanges with other cultures and nations over the centuries. It is based on both land and sea products. Conquests or demographic movement towards the Algerian territory were two of the main factors of exchanges between the different peoples and cultures. The Algerian cuisine is a mix of Arab, Berber, Turkish and French roots.
Algerian cuisine offers a variety of dishes depending on the region and the season, but vegetables and cereals remain at its core. Most of the Algerian dishes are centred around bread, meats (lamb, beef or poultry), olive oil, vegetables, and fresh herbs. Vegetables are often used for salads, soups, tajines, and sauce-based dishes. Of all the Algerian traditional dishes available, the most famous one is couscous, recognised as a national dish.

Sports
Various games have existed in Algeria since antiquity. In the Aures, people played several games such as El Kherba or El Khergueba (chess variant). Playing cards, checkers and chess games are part of Algerian culture. Racing (fantasia) and rifle shooting are part of cultural recreation of the Algerians.
Football is the most popular sport in the country. The Algerian national football team, known as the Desert Foxes, has a strong fan base and has achieved success both domestically and internationally.
Algeria has a long history in other sports such as athletics, boxing, volleyball, handball and the study of martial arts. Algerian athletes have competed in the Olympic Games and have won medals in various events. Many sports clubs and organisations exist in Algeria to promote and develop sports among young people. The Ministry of Youth and Sports in Algeria manages sport-related activities.

See also
Outline of Algeria
List of rivers of Algeria
Algerian Space Agency
1213 Algeria, asteroid

Explanatory notes
Citations
General bibliography
External links
Key Development Forecasts for Algeria from International Futures

Government
Public Services Archived 20 April 2025 at the Wayback Machine – gateway to government sites
El Mouradia Palace Archived 10 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine – official website of the president of Algeria
Statistics – official website of National Office of Statistics

History
"History" – Algerian history at Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Tourism
Visit Algeria Archived 6 February 2023 at the Wayback Machine – Algeria's official tourism portal

Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Algeria
 Geographic data related to Algeria at OpenStreetMap

## Tourism in Algeria
Algeria is the largest country in Africa; one of the main tourist attractions is the Sahara, the largest desert in the world. Algeria has been a member of the World Tourism Organization since 1976. According to a report of the World Tourism Organization published in 2014, Algeria was the 4th largest tourist destination in Africa in 2013 with 2.7 million foreign tourists, and ranks 111th on the international tourism scene, according to the London-based World Tourism and Travel Council (WTTC). The tourism sector in Algeria accounts for 3.9% of the volume of exports, 9.5% of the productive investment rate and 8.1% of the gross domestic product.
The main competitors are other Mediterranean countries, the majority of which have developed a strong tourism-based economy. The tourism sector in Algeria remains weak concerning accommodation and other services. For this reason, the government launched a strategic plan to boost this sector entitled “The 2030 Master Plan for Tourism Development”.
According to the U.S. News & World Report, Algeria was ranked among the top 80 countries in the world in 2018.
The US national newspaper USA Today ranked Constantine among the eleven cities to visit the world in 2018. The newspaper was based on the experience of Sal Lavallo, one of the youngest people to have visited all 193 member states of the United Nations.

Tourism policy of the state
A project developed during the "National and International Conference of Tourism" was born providing a new dynamics of reception and management of tourism in Algeria. This project is called (Horizon 2025). Foreign investors, mainly French, position themselves to dominate the market, focused mainly on a business clientele.
An initial advertising campaign was rolled out to attract investors and foreign customers, along with conferences, trade shows and commissions.
The World Cup-winning former footballer Zinedine Zidane of Algerian descent was also used for a new commercial carried out under the aegis of the telephony operator, Ooredoo Algeria, intended for an international audience.
A Quality Tourism Plan Algeria was adopted by the government but by the end of 2010, only 10% of tourist structures in Algeria have joined this program. Investors remain interested in the potential of the country, as well as the high authorities, as the representative of the Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization (WTO), Frédéric Perret, told the conference of the International Tourism and Travel Exhibition held In Algeria in 2010, that the Algerian tourism sector has great potential thanks to its "Mediterranean beaches, its fascinating Djurdjura National Park, its human, cultural and historical treasures."
As part of the tourism development policy, 'Eductour' is regularly organized for the national and international.

World Heritage Sites
Algeria is home to seven UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

Religion in Algeria is dominated by Islam at about ninety-nine percent of the population.  The vast majority of Muslims in Algeria adhere to Sunni Islam of Maliki school of jurisprudence. There are also almost 100,000 Christians, mostly Pentecostal Protestants.  There are nearly 2,000 Jews living in Algeria, according to the US department of State.
This is a list of some of the best-known mosques and churches in Algeria:

Djamaâ El Djazaïr
Djamaâ El Djazaïr (Mosque of Algeria, in Arabic: جامع الجزائر); or Great Mosque of Algeria (in Arabic: مسجد الجزائر الأعظم) is a mosque in the process of completion, located in Mohammedia in Algiers. It is the largest mosque in Algeria and Africa and the third largest mosque in the world by total area, after the Great Mosque of Mecca and the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi Mosque in Medina.

Ketchaoua Mosque
Ketchaoua Mosque is a mosque in Algiers. It is located at the foot of the Casbah, which was built during the Ottoman rule in the 17th century, which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The mosque stands on the first of the Casbah's many steep stairways, and was logistically and symbolically the cynosure of the pre-colonial city of Algiers. The mosque is noted for its unique fusion of Moorish and Byzantine architecture.

Notre-Dame d'Afrique
Notre-Dame d'Afrique (Our Lady of Africa) is a Roman Catholic basilica in Algiers. Louis-Antoine-Augustin Pavy, who served as the Bishop of Algiers from 1846 to 1866, paved the way for its construction. The basilica was inaugurated in 1872, after fourteen years of construction. It was founded by Charles Lavigerie. Its architect, Jean-Eugène Fromageau, who had been appointed the chief architect for ecclesiastical buildings in French Algeria in 1859, employed a Neo-Byzantine style. Its floor plan is unusual as the choir is situated on the southeast instead of the usual east side of the building.

1st November of 1954 Great Mosque
1st November of 1954 Great Mosque is considered to be the largest mosque in Algeria and the second in Africa It is located in the town of Batna. This imposing religious building has been open to the faithful since 2003 and is one of the great architectural achievements of the city.

Saint Augustin Basilica
The Basilique Saint Augustin (Basilica of St Augustine) is a Roman Catholic basilica and Pro-cathedral dedicated to Saint Augustine of Hippo located in Annaba, Algeria. The basilica is under the circumscription of the Diocese of Constantine. Construction of the basilica began in 1881 and finished on March 29, 1900, though the church was not dedicated until April 24, 1914.  The statue of St. Augustine in the basilica contains one of his arm bones. It was built not far from the remains of the Basilica Pacis built by Saint Augustine, where he died while the city was besieged by Vandals.

Cathédrale du Sacré-Cœur d'Oran
Cathédrale du Sacré-Cœur d'Oran is a Roman Catholic church located on the Place de la Kahina, on Boulevard Hammou-boutlelis, in Oran.

Djama'a al-Djedid
Djama'a al-Djedid, also referred to as the Jamaa al-Jadid, Jamaa El Jedid, or the New Mosque, (Turkish: Yeni Camii, meaning New Mosque) is an Ottoman mosque located in Algiers, the capital of Algeria. It was built in 1660 in accordance with the traditions of the Hanafi school. During the French colonial rule, the mosque was called the Mosquée de la Pêcherie and in English the Mosque of the Fisherman's Wharf.

Great Mosque of Tlemcen
Great Mosque of Tlemcen was first built in Tlemcen, Algeria in 1082. It is one of the best-preserved examples of Almoravid architecture. It was built under sultan Yusuf ibn Tashfin but substantially reconstructed and enlarged by his son Ali ibn Yusuf. An inscription dates this reconstruction to 1136. Sultan Yaghmoracen (1236-1283), the founder of the Abdalwadid dynasty of Tlemcen added a section with a minaret and a dome in the 13th century. Next, to the mosque, there used to be an Islamic court (Makhama) and an Islamic university of considerable fame.

Abdallah Ibn Salam Mosque
Abdallah Ibn Salam Mosque is a mosque in Algeria. Formerly the Great Synagogue of Oran (in Arabic: معبد وهران العظيم), it was built in 1880 at the initiative of Simon Kanoui, but its inauguration took place only in 1918. Also known as Temple Israelite, it is located on the former Boulevard Joffre, currently Boulevard Maata Mohamed El Habib. It was one of the largest synagogues in North Africa.
Once Algeria gained its independence in 1962, almost all Jewish settlers had returned to France. An estimated 100 to 120 thousand Jewish settlers, as well as a million other European settlers and 100 thousand Muslim Harkis, had fled Algeria choosing to settle in France during the Pied-Noir exodus.
The Jewish settlers relocating to France in the 1960s were assigned "repatriate" status and classed alongside the European settler population because the Jews of Algeria had been French citizens since the Crémieux Decree of 1870.
The Abdallah Ibn Salam mosque is named after the 7th-century Jew from Medina who converted to Islam.

Cultural tourism
Algeria benefits from important natural assets such as its beaches in general still in the wild, landscapes and zones like the Algerian Desert. There are 10 national parks in Algeria, including the Tassili Cultural Park (100,000 ha) or the Ahaggar Cultural Park (Hoggar) (380,000 ha)
Hiking enthusiasts have access to the vast mountains of Kabylia. Despite what is thought, Algeria also has a ski area in Tikjda as well as spas.
Architecturally, there are strong Berber, Arabic, Spanish and French influences following colonization, but also more contemporary works. The main post office in Algiers remains a monument of the neo-Moorish type, the work of Jules Voinot and Marius Toudoire. The Casbah of Algiers is also a place of visit classified as a world heritage of UNESCO since 1982.

National Parks
Ahaggar National Park
Belezma National Park
Chrea National Park
Djurdjura National Park
El Kala National Park
Gouraya National Park
Tassili n'Ajjer National Park
Taza National Park
Theniet El Had National Park
Tlemcen National Park

Museums
Ahmed Zabana National Museum
Archaeological Museum of Cherchell
Bardo National Museum of Prehistory and Ethnography
Béni Abbès Museum
Museum of Antiquities (Algiers)
Museum of Modern Art of Algiers
Museum of Popular Arts and Traditions
Museum of the Revolution
National Museum of Fine Arts of Algiers

Festivals
International Arab Film Festival
Timgad International Music Festival
DimaJazz
International Book Fair of Algiers
Nuits de la Saoura
International Cultural Festival of Algerian Symphonic Music
Arab-African folk dance festival in Tizi Ouzou
Algiers International Comics Festival

Saharan Tourism
The Algerian Sahara is one of the most important tourist destinations in Algeria, the Great South is a flagship destination internationally. Hiking is not the only way to discover the Sahara, in fact, camel rides on a Meharée camel or in a 4x4 vehicle, or even formulas combining hiking, camel trekking, and 4x4.
The Algerian Desert is located in north-central Africa and is part of the Sahara Desert. The desert occupies more than four-fifths of the Algerian territory. Its expansion starts from the Saharan Atlas, more or less as a stony desert and the farther inland you get the more of a sand dune desert it becomes.
In the southwestern parts is the mountain range Tassili n'Ajjer located. This area is a subject of great archaeological interest and was put up on the "World Heritage List" by UNESCO in 1982. The area is known for extreme aridity and extreme heat, as daytime temperatures are commonly between 46 °C (113 °F) and 51 °C (122 °F) during the hottest period of the year in most of the desert.
Cities and towns such as Ouargla, Touggourt, Beni Abbes, Adrar, In Salah are among the hottest places on Earth during the height of summer. The annual average rainfall is well below 100  mm (3,93 in) in the northernmost part but the center and the southern part receive much less than 50  mm (1,96 in) and are therefore hyper-arid and among the driest places on Earth.
Among the unmissable places of the Sahara in quote:

Tamanrasset
Timimoun
Djanet
Ouargla
Béchar

Therapeutic Tourism
Algeria has many thermal resorts including:

Hammam Essalihine
Hammam Guergour
Hammam Boughrara
Hammam Bou Hadjar
Hammam Meskhoutine
Hammam Soukhna
Hammam Righa
Hammam Melouane
Hammam Ouled Yelles

Cuisine
The cuisine of Algeria is a fusion of Andalusian, Berber, Mediterranean. It differs slightly from region to region. Every region has its own cuisine, including Kabylie, Algiers (couscous) and Constantine.
Algerian cuisine is influenced by various cultures such as Berber, Arabic, and French. Most of the Algerian dishes are centered around lamb or beef, olive oil, fresh vegetables, and fresh herbs. Traditionally, no Algerian meal is complete without bread, normally a long French baguette or more traditionally a flat semolina bread. Pork consumption is forbidden to devout Muslim inhabitants of Algeria in accordance with Sharia, religious laws of Islam.
Algeria, like other Maghreb countries, produces a large range of Mediterranean fruits and vegetables and even some tropical ones. Lamb is commonly consumed. Mediterranean seafood and fish are also eaten and produced by the little inshore fishing.
Algerians consume a high amount of meat, as it is found in almost every dish. Mutton is the most eaten meat in the country. Poultry and beef are also eaten Other uncommon types of meat such as game, birds, and venison are considered a delicacy. Wild boar is also hunted and eaten. While pork is not available in stores, it can only be bought from hunters directly. 
Vegetables that are commonly used include potatoes (batata/betetè), carrots (zrodiya), onions (bsel), tomatoes (tomatish/tømètish), zucchini (corget/qar'a), garlic (ethom), cabbages (cromb), and eggplant (badenjan). Olives (zéton) are also used. Vegetables are often used in stews (jwaz/djwizza) and soups (chorba) or simply fried or boiled.
The Kesra, traditional Algerian flatbread, is the base of Algerian cuisine and eaten at many meals. A popular Algerian meal is merguez, an originally Berber sausage.
A common and one of the most popular dishes of Algerian cuisine is couscous, with other common dishes include shakshouka, Karantita, marqa bel a'assel, a speciality from Tlemcen, and chakhchoukha. Spices used in Algerian cuisine are dried red chillies of different kinds, caraway, Arabian ras el hanout, black pepper and cumin, among others.
Algerians also use tagines, handmade in Algeria. Algerian food is often cooked in clay vessels, much like Maghrib cuisine. Algerian cuisine represents the region north of the Sahara desert and west of the Nile.
Algerian chefs take a lot of pride in cooking skills and methods and their many secrets lie in the variety of ways they mix special spices.
There are many different types of Algerian salads, influenced by French and Turkish cuisine, which may include beetroot or anchovies. There are also dishes of Spanish origin in Algeria, like the Gaspacho Oranais, an Algerian version of a Manchego dish.

Climate
Northern Algeria is in the temperate zone and has a mild, Mediterranean climate. It lies within approximately the same latitudes as southern California and has somewhat similar climatic conditions. Its broken topography, however, provides sharp local contrasts in both prevailing temperatures and incidence of rainfall. Year-to-year variations in climatic conditions are also common. This area, the most inhabited in Algeria, is commonly referred to as the Tell.

Transportation
As the tenth-largest country in the world, and the largest in Africa and in the Mediterranean region, Algeria has a vast transportation system which includes many transportation infrastructures.

See also
Tourism in Africa
Visa policy of Algeria
Economy of Algeria
Museums in Algeria
Boudouaou Valley

References
External links

Ministry of Tourism and Handicraft
Algerian National Tourist Office

## Culture of Algeria
The culture of Algeria encompasses literature, music, religion, cuisine, and other facets of life in Algeria.

Religion
The state religion of Algeria is Islam. About 99% of the Algerian population are Muslims, specifically Muslims. It also has Christian and Jewish minorities who make up less than 1% of the population.
Islam was introduced to Algeria with the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in the 7th century. Under Umayyad rule, Musa ibn Nusayr continued the program of spreading Islam and the Arabic language through missionary activity and chose seventeen religious scholars to convert the locals. Many people became Muslims at the hands of these scholars and the inhabitants of the Maghreb gradually converted to Islam. Caliph Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz sent to the governor of Ifriqiya Ismail ibn Abdallah all scholars and men of culture, who were ordered to teach the religion of Islam. They were distributed around the regions of the Maghreb. In less than one century, the great majority of Christians converted to Islam with 'great zeal that they sought martyrdom', and the final conversions took place in the first two centuries after the hijrah. The Arab migration to the Maghreb consolidated this process.
Since independence after the Algerian War, regimes have sought to develop an Islamic Arab socialist state, and a cabinet-level ministry acts for the government in religious affairs. President Houari Boumédiene sought to increase Islamic awareness and to reduce Western influence, although the rights of non-Muslims continued to be respected.

Greetings
Greetings in Algeria have been described as lengthy. In addition to handshaking, Algerians ask about health, family and work to show concerns for others. Friends and family also exchange kisses on the cheeks. Some Algerian men might avoid prolonged eye contact with women and avoid personal questions. These behaviors are observed out of respect and to maintain appropriate social manners. Most Algerians uphold Arab traditions of hospitality, and are friendly and helpful.

Cuisine
Algerian cuisine features cooking styles and dishes derived from traditional Arab, Amazigh, Turkish, and French cuisine. The influence of Jewish, Spanish, Berber, and Italian cuisines can also be observed. The cuisine is flavorful, often featuring a blend of traditional Mediterranean spices and chili peppers. Couscous is a staple of the diet, often served with stews and other fare. Other popular Algeria dishes include doulma, chakhchoukha, and chtitha.

Dress
Algerian clothing, influenced by the country's rich history and cultural heritage, varies among different regions and communities in Algeria. Traditional Algerian clothing is Islamic custom, although there are Algerians who adopted clothing based on Western style, especially in the cities. In urban areas, there is a mix of traditional clothing and increasingly common Western-style clothing, whereas traditional clothing is much more common in rural areas. As an Islamic country, Algeria has limits on dress code. Most Algerians follow Islamic dress codes, and foreigners are expected to show modesty, such as female visitors having to avoid exposing their shoulders, knees or chest.
One of the most common traditional garments for both men and women in Algeria is djellaba. The djellaba is a long, loose-fitting robe that typically reaches down to the ankles. It is made from various fabrics, such as cotton or wool. The djellaba usually has long sleeves and a hood, and it is often worn over other clothing. In rural areas, women often wear a traditional dress called haik. The haik is a large rectangular piece of fabric, usually made of wool or cotton, which covers the body and is wrapped around the head as a hood. The haik is typically white, but it can also be found in other colors and patterns. It is of Andalusi Arab origin. The traditional dress for men in Algeria includes a loose-fitting shirt called gandoura. The gandoura is usually made of lightweight fabric and is worn over sirwal. Men also wear a variety of head coverings, such as turbans or fez hats.
In urban areas and on special occasions, Algerians often wear modern Western-style clothing. However, traditional garments are still highly valued and are worn for cultural celebrations, religious events, and weddings. Other examples of traditional Algerian dress include the qashabiya, kaftan and karakou. In Kabylia and the Aurès, Berber jewellery made of silver, beads, and other items was an important component of Berber identities up to the mid-20th century.

Literature
Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic and French, has been strongly influenced by the country's recent history. Well-known poets in modern Algeria are Moufdi Zakaria, Mohammed Al Aid, Achour Fenni, Amar Meriech, and Azrag Omar. Famous novelists of the 20th century include Mohammed Dib, Albert Camus, Kateb Yacine, Ahlam Mosteghanemi, and Assia Djebar. Among the important novelists of the 1980s were Rachid Mimouni, later vice-president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views.
In philosophy and the humanities, Jacques Derrida, the father of deconstruction, was born in El Biar in Algiers. Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are known for their writings on decolonization. Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (modern-day Souk Ahras), and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while staying in Algeria.
Algerian culture has been strongly influenced by Islam. The works of the Sanusi family in pre-colonial times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times, are widely known. The Latin author Apuleius was born in Madaurus (Mdaourouch), in what later became Algeria.

Music
The Algerian musical genre best known abroad is raï. Originating in western Algeria in the early 1900s as a combination of popular music and traditional Bedouin desert music, it emerged as a major world-music genre in the 1980s. It is a pop-flavored, opinionated take on folk music, performed by internationally-known talent such as Khaled and Cheb Mami. It sounds like pop music, sung in Arabic with tonal and instrumental influences of traditional Bedouin music, as well as cultural and religious influences. Singers of Raï are called cheb (Arabic: شاب, or shabab, meaning young) as opposed to sheikh (Arabic: شيخ, shaykh, meaning old). Within Algeria, raï remains the most popular musical form, but older generations tend to prefer shaabi, performed by singers such as Dahmane El Harrachi.
Although raï is now generally welcomed and praised as a cultural emblem of Algeria, in the post-independence period the form was often attacked or criticised by Islamic and government authorities. These attitudes began to change around 1985, partially due to the influence of Colonel Snoussi, an ex-military officer turned raï artist. Another reason for the shift in attitude toward raï was the music's growing popularity in France, which the Algerian government viewed as positive.
Andalusi music, brought from Al-Andalus by Morisco refugees, can still be heard in many older coastal towns.
Kabyle music, exemplified by Idir, Ait Menguellet, or Lounès Matoub, also enjoys a wide popularity.

Women in Algeria
In comparison to other Muslim majority countries, Algerian women overall have historically possessed more levels of freedom. Algerian women have seemed to be offered more leniency and have continuously proved to have an important voice in Algerian society. However, while they seem to receive leniency, they still suffer from an overall lack of protection of legislation or cultural norms.

Examples
Examples of leniency can be depicted through women only having to wear their veils inside cities, not throughout their daily life, regardless of their location. Historically, oppression of Algerian women grew during the French imperial period in 1965. Culturally, French influence caused Algerian men to have their voices oppressed and denied their pride, causing them to lash out in their domestic lives. However, this is not a direct representation of Algerian culture. The women's rights movement in Algeria continues to be a prevalent cultural movement to this day.

Media
Visual arts
1910: a generation of precursors
During the first half of the twentieth century, artists mainly recuperated models and patterns imported – or imposed – by an imperialist French power.
As Edward Said argued in his book Orientalism in 1978, Algerian artists struggled with the perception and representations of Westerners. Almost a century after the conquest by the French, Azouaou Mammeri (1886–1954), Abdelhalim Hemche (1906–1978), Mohammed Zmirli (1909-1984), and Miloud Boukerche (1920–1979) were the first to introduce easel painting. They benefited from "breaches" in the educational system and were able to pursue training in plastic arts. Even though they attempted to focus on the reality of Algerians' everyday routine, they were still, to a certain extent, incorporated in the Orientalist movement.
The tradition of oriental illumination and miniature was introduced around the same period, through artists such as Mohamed Racim (1896–1974) or Mohamed Temman (1915-1988). It is the two main expressions of figuration in a country where popular abstract symbolic, Berberian or Arabic, are integrated mainly through architecture, furniture, weaving, pottery, leather and metal workmanship.
How to reappropriate one's own history is a dynamic in Algerian contemporary art, reflecting on the deep social changes people experienced.
Artists attempt a successful introspective work in which the duality in terms of identity creates a dynamic that overcomes "orientalism" and exoticism. The main stake is for the artist and the spectator to reappropriate a liberty of expression and interpretation.
Main artists of that period are: Boukerche, Benaboura, Ali Ali Khodja, Yelles, or Baya.

1930: a generation of founders
The vast majority of the artists incorporate the theme of the independence war, from those who lived it to the artists who use it as a legacy. Impregnated by all the artistic and ideological movements that marked the first half of the twentieth century, artists are concerned with the society they live in and denounce segregation, racism and injustice that divided communities of colonial Algeria.
There was a clear shift from orientalism and exoticism: new themes such as trauma and pain appear, for instance, in the portrait The Widow (1970) by Mohamed Issiakhem.
"Art is a form of resistance as it suggests and makes visible the invisible, the hidden, it stands alert on the side of life".
It was also a time when Algerian artists started organizing themselves, through the National Union of Plastic Arts or UNAP (1963), for instance; artists such as Mohamed Issiakhem or Ali Khodja were part of it.

Non-figuration and "Painters of the Sign"
Abdallah Benanteur and Mohamed Khadda opened a path for abstract (non-figurative) Algerian art. They were French since childhood and emigrated to France. They were followed by artists such as Mohamed Aksouh, Mohamed Louail, Abdelkader Guermaz and Ali Ali-Khodja.
Mohamed Khadda wrote: "If figurative painting appears as the norm in terms of expression, it is the result of an acculturation phenomenon". Artworks are a form of liberation in that sense, as literal representations do not seem to fully emerge from the cluster of exotism and orientalism.
The "Painters of the Sign" are Algerian artists born in the 1930s who, at the beginning of the 1960s, found inspiration in the abstract rhythm of Arabic writing. The term "peintres du Signe" was coined by the poet Jean Sénac in 1970. He was hosting in Alger the "Gallerie 54".  The first collective exhibition reunited Aksouh, Baya, Abdallah Benanteur, Bouzid, Abdelkader Guermaz, Khadda, Jean de Maisonseul, Maria Manton, Martinez, Louis Nallard and Rezki Zérarti. He wrote in his presentation: "In this gallery 54, which aims at being a gallery of research in permanent contact with the people, we have brought together artists, Algerian or having deep links with our country" "We can assert, with Mourad Bourboune, that our artists do not only exhume the devastated face of our Mother, but, in the midst of the Nahda (renewal), they build a new image of the Man and stare endlessly at his new Vision".

Aouchem
Algerian artists reconnected with part of their historical and cultural legacy, especially the influence of Berber culture and language. A great deal of attention was brought upon the Berber culture and identity revendications after the Berber Spring in 1988, and it impacted the cultural production.
Denis Martinez and Choukri Mesli participated in the creation of the group Aouchem (Tattoo), which held several exhibitions in Algiers and Blida in 1967, 1968 et 1971. A dozen artists, painters and poets decided to oppose the mainstream organization of art – especially of figurative art, they believe to be represented by the UNAP, the National Union for Plastic Art. They opposed their policy of excluding many active painters.  According to its manifesto : "Aouchem was born centuries ago, on the walls of a cave of Tassili. It continued its existence until today, sometimes secretly, sometimes openly, according to fluctuations of history. (...) We want to show that, always magical, the sign is stronger than bombs".
In spite of a surge of political violence following the war of independence, where the hegemony of the Arabic culture and language tended to overlap with the Berberian culture, the plastic traditions of popular signs managed to be maintained. Aouchem builds on this traditional legacy.

Naivety and expressionism
Since the 1980s, there has been a renewal and also a form of "naivety", trying to go past the trauma of the war and address new contemporary issues. Baya (1931–1998) is the example of a great Algerian success story. Her work was prefaced by André Breton and exposed by André Meight when she was still a teenager. She who has not known her mother as she was doubly orphaned by the age of 5, produced colorful watercolors with fake symmetries, questioning the figure of the Mother. She is part of the art brut movement.
Expressionism was dominated by Mohamed Issiakhem, affectionately nicknamed "Oeil de lynx" (lynx eye) by his fellow writer Kateb Yacine. When he was 15, he had an accident with a grenade. Two of his sisters and his nephew died, and his forearm had to be amputated. His personal drama resonates in work.  He expressed themes like grief and loss through the use of thick pastes and universal figures; as an echo of the hardships of the Algerian war, as well as the universal struggle of those silenced and oppressed.

Renewal of visual arts
Since the 1980s, a new generation of Maghrebi artists has arisen. A large proportion is trained in Europe. Artists locally and among the Diaspora explore new techniques and face the challenges of a globalized art market. They are bringing together various elements of their identity, marked by the status of immigrant of first or second generation.  They address issues that speak to the Arab world with an "outsider" lens. Kader Attia is one of them. He was born in France in 1970.  In a large installation in 2007 called Ghost, he displayed dozens of veiled figures on their knees, made of aluminum foil.
Adel Abdessemed, born in Constantina in 1970, attended the École des Beaux-Arts in Algiers, Algeria and then Lyon, France. Through his conceptual artworks, he displays strong artistic statements using a wide range of media (drawing, video, photography, performance, and installation). In 2006, he exhibited at the David Zimmer gallery in New York City. One of his artworks was a burnt car entitled Practice Zero Tolerance, a year after riots in France and in the midst of a resurgence of terrorist attacks since 11 September 2001.
Katia Kameli [1] also brings in the multiple aspects of her identity and environment, through video, photographs and installations.

Cinema
Sports
Football, handball, athletics, boxing, martial arts, volleyball and basketball are the most popular sports in the country.

See also
Architecture of Algeria
List of Orientalist artists
Outline of culture
Women in Algeria

References
External links
Tourisme information
Algerie Information Archived 28 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine

## Cuisine of Algeria
Algerian cuisine is influenced by Algeria's interactions and exchanges with other cultures and nations over the centuries. It is based on both land and sea products. Conquests or demographic movement towards the Algerian territory were two of the main factors of exchanges between the different peoples and cultures, including multiple flavors and influences, reflecting the country's history and position at the crossroads of the Mediterranean. Algerian cuisine arises from a mix of Arab, Berber, Turkish and European roots.
Algerian cuisine offers a variety of dishes depending on the region and the season, but vegetables and cereals remain at its core. Most Algerian dishes are centered around breads, meats (lamb, beef or poultry), olive oil, vegetables, and fresh herbs. Vegetables are often used for salads, soups, tajines, couscous, and sauce-based dishes. Of all the Algerian traditional dishes available, the most famous one is Algerian couscous, recognized as a national dish.
Pork consumption is forbidden to Muslims in Algeria, in accordance with Islamic dietary laws.

Ingredients
Algeria, like other Maghreb countries, produces a large range of Mediterranean fruits and vegetables and even some tropical ones. Lamb is commonly consumed. Mediterranean seafood and fish are also eaten.

Meats
Algerians consume a significant amount of meat, and it is found in almost every dish. Mutton is the most eaten meat in the country.

Poultry and beef are also used; more uncommon types of meat such as game birds and venison are considered delicacies. In the south, dromedary (camel meat) is also eaten.
Meat could traditionally be dried in regions such as Kabylia as a way to preserve the meat for long amounts of time.
Merguez is a type of sausage originating from the Berber people.

Vegetables
Commonly eaten vegetables include potatoes (batata/betetè), carrots (zrodiya/sennariya), turnip (lefft), onions (bsel/besla), tomatoes (tomatish/tømètish/t'matem), zucchini (corget/qar'a /khyar), garlic (ethoum), cabbages (cromb), eggplant (bidenjan), olives (zéton), pennyroyal (fliou), cardoon (korchef), broad bean (fool), chickpea (homoss), artichoke (qarnoun) and chili pepper (felfel).
Vegetables are often used in stews (tagine/jwaz/djwizza) and soups (chorba/harira/jari), or simply fried or steamed.

Fish and seafood
Sardines, hake, shrimp, octopus, tuna and cod are the main items of seafood commonly eaten in Algerian cuisine, mostly in stews or fried.

Spices
Many spices are used in Algerian cuisine, including different kinds of dried red chili pepper, caraway, cumin, cinnamon, turmeric, ginger, paprika, coriander, saffron, mace, cloves, fennel, anise, nutmeg, cayenne pepper, fenugreek, and black pepper.
Some spice mixes are also traditional to the North African region, such as ras el hanout, which can be made of up to 27 spices.
Hror is a spice mix typical of Algerian cuisine mainly made from galangal, cubeb, nutmeg and cinnamon, but recipes may include more spices and herbs such as liquorice or pellitory.

Dishes
Starters and appetizers
Some small starters can be eaten either before the main dish (traditionally done during Ramadan). These starters are generally soups (most famously chorba) but also include kemia, some small dish of offal (such as liver or kidneys) or carrots with cumin (zorodiyya mcharmla). Some traditional salads such as chlata felfel (a salad of roasted/smoked peppers, tomatoes, onions or scallions and garlic with olive oil and vinegar, generally served cold), zaalouka (ratatouille of eggplants and tomatoes mainly, served hot or cold) or salads made with beets, corn, cucumber, tomatoes and eggs can also be served before a meal.

Main dishes
A common and one of the most favorite dishes of Algerian cuisine is couscous. The semolina is traditionally made from wheat but can also be made with barley. The grains can also be fermented to make el Hammoun couscous. The dish can be prepared in many ways, generally with a sauce with beef or lamb and zucchini, carrots, chickpeas and green bean, chicken, lentils and black-eyed pea. Couscous can also be consumed in a masfouf (or thameqfoult in Kabyle), a dry version with no sauce and vegetables such as broad beans, peas or also with raisins and dates, traditionally along with fermented milk.
Several pasta dishes can be found in the traditional Algerian cuisine: rechta, chakhchoukha, berkoukes, tikourbabine (also called asban), Aftir oukessoul tlitli or trida. These traditional pasta dishes are prepared in a red stew, with the exception of rechta which is generally made in a white stew in Algeria, with meat and vegetables.
Vegetarian dishes in Algeria are also a main part of the diet with karantita (chickpeas flan), tbikha (vegetable stew), shakshouka (sort of ratatouille, often cooked with eggs), zaalouka (ratatouille of eggplants and tomatoes mainly, served hot or cold). These dishes are often consumed with bread.
Tajine or djouez are traditional dishes prepared in a stew or cooked in a similar way, originally in an earthen pot. They can be vegetarian, but are generally made of a meat (either lamb or chicken) and vegetables. Particular tajines made in a red sauce are called chtitha (for example, chtitha djaj is a chicken dish cooked in a red sauce with chickpeas). Other well-known dishes include koubeb (chicken cooked in a white sauce with cinnamon and chickpeas and served with thick fries and parsley), zviti, and marqa bel a'assel (a speciality from Tlemcen).
Some additional dishes include:

Bourek—fried spring rolls with various stuffing, including meat, tuna, potato, and cheese. A popular variant, the bourek annabi, from Annaba, is bigger and stuffed with mashed potatoes, ground beef, mushrooms, cheese, eggs and parsley.
Mhadjeb—flatbread stuffed with onions and tomato sauce.
Shakshouka, chakshoka, shakhshosha—a mixture of onions, tomato, bell peppers, zucchini and eggs. There are many regional versions.
Chorba frik or jari—a tomato-based soup with lamb.
Frites-omelette—French fries with eggs.
Dobara—chickpea soup.
Dolma—stuffed vegetables cooked in a stock.
Tajine mtewem—meatballs cooked in a tajine.

Soups
Algeria has four well-known traditional soups consumed throughout the country: chorba frik (which is also cooked with kadaif in some regions in place of the frik), harira, djari and tchicha. These traditional Algerian soups are served at the beginning of the meal as an entree and are mainly prepared from lamb, mutton or chicken, chickpeas, tomatoes, vermicelli, wheat, spices and different vegetables and legumes. These varied soups are the most popular during the holy month of Ramadan. The gaspacho oranais is an Algerian version of a Manchego dish. The chorba has another variant, the chorba bida (white chorba) which is cooked with chicken, kadaif, chickpeas and pasley without any tomato. It is traditionally eaten with a squeeze of lemon juice.

Desserts
Typically, seasonal fruits are served as a dessert at the end of meals. These fruits include watermelon, loquat, grape, pomegranate or dates (which can also be served at the beginning of the meal).
Common pastries include dziriyat, garn ghzal (similar to gazelle ankles), baqlawa, mhancha, bradj, makroudh, kalb elouz, zlabiya, and griwech (a deep-fried pretzel-shaped dough, soaked in honey and sprinkled with sesame seeds).
Many pastries are prepared for special occasions, such as Eid-al-Fitr and weddings. For example, the mouna was traditionally served by newlywed women to other women during their traditional hammam. The tamina is a kind of paste made with semolina, butter, hror or other spices and honey, usually served after a woman gave birth.
M'semen, sfenj or baghrir are generally served with tea and can be topped with honey, jam or even olive oil and sugar.
Creponne, a sorbet which originated in Oran, is a specialty in Algeria. Other desserts and cakes such as sfenj and kroki mchawcha are also commonly eaten.

Drinks
Green tea with mint is generally drunk in the afternoon and during ceremonies with pastries. When fresh mint is not available, dried leaves can be used instead. Geranium tea can also be prepared with geranium leaves instead of mint. Generally, tea is prepared with green tea leaves, either of the gunpowder blend or chaara sandook (green tea with a lighter taste than the bitter gunpowder blend).
Algerians are heavy coffee consumers; thick espresso and black coffee are very popular, Algerian breakfast consists of a latte coffee with croissants or bread with butter or any Algerian sweets like Algerian baklawa, msemen or baghrir topped with honey or jam. Mazagran, which is said to be the “original iced coffee”, originated in Algeria; it is a cold sweetened coffee drink.
Cherbet mazhar is a traditional beverage drunk during marriages in the northern parts of the country. It is a syrup made with water, sugar and orange flower water (mazhar). Sherbet Miliana is another traditional syrup made from cherries originating from Miliana.
Fruit juice and soft drinks, called gazouz, are common and often drunk daily. The most famous Algerian soda is Hamoud Boualem, an Algerian soft drink manufacturer that makes drinks popular in Algeria and exports them abroad, primarily for consumption by Algerian emigrants. It is one of the country's oldest companies, having been founded in 1878. Their products include sodas like "Selecto," "Hamoud," and "Slim", each in multiple flavors, as well as syrups in different flavors.
Algeria previously produced a large quantity of Algerian wine during the French colonization but production has decreased since its independence. Alcohol consumption is frowned upon in Algeria but is not legally prohibited, which does not prevent the winegrower from producing a wide variety of wines mainly from the slopes of Mascara, Médéa and Tlemcen.

Sauces and condiments
Algerian cuisine is characterized by its use of flavorful spices and herbs, and a variety of sauces play an important role in many dishes. Two popular Algerian sauces are harissa and dersa.
Harissa is a spicy chili paste that is made from dried chili peppers, garlic, olive oil, and various spices such as caraway and coriander. It is often used as a condiment to add heat and flavor to stews, soups, and grilled meats. Harissa can also be used as a marinade for meat or seafood.
Dersa is a milder sauce that is made from garlic, lemon juice, olive oil, and a variety of herbs such as parsley, cilantro, and mint. It is often used as a dipping sauce for bread, vegetables, or grilled meats. Dersa can also be used as a marinade or dressing for salads.
Zaalouk: a traditional dip used in Algeria made from eggplant, tomatoes, garlic, and spices, typically served as an appetizer or side dish.
Chermoula, a marinade made from garlic, cilantro, lemon juice, and spices, commonly used to flavor seafood and meat dishes.
Toum: a garlic sauce made from garlic, lemon juice, and olive oil, similar to aioli, often served with grilled meats or as a dip.
Shakshuka sauce: a spicy tomato sauce made with onions, peppers, and a variety of spices, often used in the popular egg dish of the same name.
Hmiss is another popular condiment in Algerian cuisine. It is a spicy tomato sauce made from roasted red peppers, tomatoes, garlic, olive oil, and chili peppers. Hmiss is usually served as a dip or spread with bread or grilled meat, and it can also be used as a topping for sandwiches or pizza. The roasted red peppers give hmiss a smoky flavor, while the chili peppers add heat, making it a flavorful and spicy condiment. In some parts of Algeria, hmiss is also made with the addition of spices such as cumin and paprika, giving it a unique regional variation.

Bread
Between 1976 and 1984, the average Algerian family spent around 56% of their income on food and drink, of which 10% was spent on bread and other cereal products. Bread is thought to contain God's blessing, baraka. It is traditionally seen as a symbol of life and functions in rituals symbolic of life, fertility and abundance.

Types of breads
Khubz as-dâr—wheat flour, water, salt and yeast. Traditionally flat and round, a few centimeters thick, made at home and commonly baked in a gas oven or communal oven.
Khubz at-tajîn or matlû—wheat semolina, yeast, water and salt. Flattened pan-bread (French: galette), baked in a previously heated earthenware or cast-iron plate on a fire.  Variations are made by the quality of the leavening agent, by adding barley or sorghum, bran, or by making it corn-based.
Khubz-ftir, raqâq, rfîs or tarîd—well-kneaded, unleavened dough, baked for half a minute on a convex sheet of brass or iron, balanced on stones over a fire. This is a preferred method for those living nomadic lives due to easy transportation of the pan and the small amount of fuel necessary.
Batbout is a small bread resembling Greek pita bread, but thicker (similar to matlû). It is eaten with stuffing inside.
French baguettes—white, leavened wheat flour. Bought at bakery or street vendor, but never made at home due to access to mills powered by electricity. Power shortages prevent consumption of this bread, and often Algerians turn to home-made breads that are milled by women's hands.

Algerian bread
French bread tends to be given more value in terms of taste and quality in that it was commonly associated to being more suitable to higher standards. However, the white inner parts of a baguette are thought to be unhealthy and will regularly be thrown away, and the bread is frequently associated with constipation.
Algerian breads, on the other hand, are considered more nutritive, rich and tasteful and seldom go to waste. Because French breads harden over night or become chewy when put away in plastic bags, it is hard to find usage for them, so they are thrown away with more frequency than Algerian breads that can be reheated or reutilized as edible food utensils or even bird feed.
In the context of rituals, only Algerian bread is thought suitable. Breads offered to guests should be homemade, as it signifies the essence, intimacy, and qualities of the family. In daily practices, it is also a sign of wealth and affluence if one has extra bread at the table, and making bread at home can be considered a sign of familial economic independence.

Gallery
See also
Arab cuisine
Berber cuisine
Mediterranean cuisine
North African cuisine
List of African cuisines

References
External links

Algerian Recipes and Culture on Global Table Adventure

## List of museums in Algeria
This is a list of museums in Algeria organized by province

List
Adrar Province
Algiers Province
Batna Province
Biskra Province
Chlef Province
Constantine Province
Djelfa Province
Ghardaïa Province
Khenchela Province
Laghouat Province
Oran Province
Ouargla Province
Oum El Bouaghi Province
Sétif Province
Tébessa Province
Tipaza Province
Tlemcen Province
See also
List of museums

Notes


== References ==